McDONALD AND AVERY’S

DENTISTRY
CHILD
ADOLESCENT
Jeffrey A. Dean, DDS, MSD
Chief of Staff, Office of the Chancellor
Indiana University-Purdue University Indianapolis
Ralph E. McDonald Professor of Pediatric Dentistry and Professor of Orthodontics
Indiana University School of Dentistry
Riley Hospital for Children at IU Health
Indianapolis, Indiana

ASSOCIATE EDITORS
James E. Jones, DMD, MSD, EdD, PhD
Professor and Chair
Department of Pediatric Dentistry
Indiana University School of Dentistry
Clinical Professor
Department of Pediatrics
Indiana University School of Medicine
Indianapolis, Indiana

LaQuia A. Walker Vinson, DDS, MPH
Assistant Professor
Pediatric Dentistry
Indiana University,
Indianapolis, Indiana

3251 Riverport Lane
St. Louis, Missouri 63043
McDONALD AND AVERY’S DENTISTRY FOR THE CHILD AND
ADOLESCENT, TENTH EDITION 
Copyright © 2016 by Elsevier, Inc. All rights reserved.

ISBN: 978-0-323-28745-6

No part of this publication may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means,
electronic or mechanical, including photocopying, recording, or any information storage and
retrieval system, without permission in writing from the Publisher. Details on how to seek permission, further information about the Publisher’s permissions policies and our arrangements with
organizations such as the Copyright Clearance Center and the Copyright Licensing Agency, can
be found at our website: www.elsevier.com/permissions.
This book and the individual contributions contained in it are protected under copyright by the
Publisher (other than as may be noted herein).

Notices
Knowledge and best practice in this field are constantly changing. As new research and experience broaden our understanding, changes in research methods, professional practices, or medical treatment may become necessary.
Practitioners and researchers must always rely on their own experience and knowledge
in evaluating and using any information, methods, compounds, or experiments described
herein. In using such information or methods they should be mindful of their own safety
and the safety of others, including parties for whom they have a professional responsibility.
With respect to any drug or pharmaceutical products identified, readers are advised to
check the most current information provided (i) on procedures featured or (ii) by the manufacturer of each product to be administered, to verify the recommended dose or formula,
the method and duration of administration, and contraindications. It is the responsibility of
practitioners, relying on their own experience and knowledge of their patients, to make diagnoses, to determine dosages and the best treatment for each individual patient, and to take all
appropriate safety precautions.
To the fullest extent of the law, neither the Publisher nor the authors, contributors, or
editors, assume any liability for any injury and/or damage to persons or property as a matter
of products liability, negligence or otherwise, or from any use or operation of any methods,
products, instructions, or ideas contained in the material herein.

Previous editions copyrighted 2011, 2004, 1998, 1994, 1987, 1983, 1978, 1974, and 1969.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
McDonald and Avery’s dentistry for the child and adolescent / [edited by] Jeffrey A. Dean, David R.
Avery, Ralph E. McDonald. -- Tenth edition.
   p. ; cm.
Dentistry for the child and adolescent
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 978-0-323-28745-6 (hardcover : alk. paper)
I. Dean, Jeffrey A. (Jeffrey Alan), editor. II. Avery, David R., editor. III. McDonald, Ralph E., 1920- ,
editor. IV. Title: Dentistry for the child and adolescent.
[DNLM: 1. Dental Care for Children. 2. Pediatric Dentistry--methods. WU 480]
RK55.C5
617.6’45--dc23
2015002959

Executive Content Strategist: Kathy Falk
Content Development Manager: Jolynn Gower
Senior Content Development Specialist: Brian Loehr
Publishing Services Manager: Patricia Tannian
Senior Project Manager: Sharon Corell
Book Designer: Ashley Miner

Printed in China.
Last digit is the print number: 9 8 7 6

5 4

3 2

1

Affectionately dedicated to my wife, Barbara, and
to my children, Courtney, Tom, and Austin. As we
all know, the time away from family to work on this
project can never be gained back, but your patience,
love, and support throughout its production are
so wonderfully appreciated.

Contributors

Johan K. Aps, DDS, MSc, MSc, PhD

Jeffrey A. Dean, DDS, MSD

Clinical Associate Professor of Oral and Maxillofacial
Radiology
Department of Oral Medicine
University of Washington
Seattle, Washington

Chief of Staff
Office of the Chancellor
Indiana University-Purdue University
Indianapolis
Ralph E. McDonald Professor of Pediatric Dentistry and
Professor of Orthodontics
Indiana University School of Dentistry
Riley Hospital for Children at IU Health
Indianapolis, Indiana

Jeffrey D. Bennett, DMD
Professor and Chair
Department of Oral Surgery and Hospital Dentistry
Indiana University School of Dentistry
Indianapolis, Indiana
Diplomate, American Board of Oral and Maxillofacial
Surgeons (ABOMS)
Diplomate, National Dental Board of Anesthesiology
Fellow, American Association of Oral and Maxillofacial
Surgeons (AAOMS)
Fellow, American Dental Society of Anesthesiology
(ADSA)

Kevin J. Donly, DDS, MS
Professor and Chair
Department of Developmental Dentistry
Professor
Department of Pediatrics
University of Texas Health Science Center at San
Antonio
San Antonio, Texas

David T. Brown, DDS, MS

Burton L. Edelstein, DDS, MPH

Chair, Department of Restorative Dentistry
Director, Undergraduate Restorative
Professor of Prosthodontics
Indiana University School of Dentistry
Indianapolis, Indiana

Professor of Dentistry and Health Policy and
Management
Department of Community Health
College of Dental Medicine
Columbia University Medical Center
New York, New York

Angus C. Cameron, BDS(Hons) MDSc
FDSRCS(Eng) FRACDS

John D. Emhardt, MD

Head
Department of Paediatric Dentistry and Orthodontics
Westmead Hospital
Westmead, New South Wales, Australia
Head and Clinical Associate Professor
Department of Paediatric Dentistry
The University of Sydney
Sydney, Australia

Riley Hospital for Children
Indiana University Health
Indianapolis, Indiana

Judith R. Chin, DDS, MS

Elie M. Ferneini, DMD, MD, MHS, MBA, FACS

Associate Professor
Department of Pediatric Dentistry
Indiana University School of Dentistry
Indianapolis, Indiana

Oral and Maxillofacial Surgeon
Assistant Clinical Professor, University of Connecticut
Medical Director, Beau Visage Med Spa
Private Practice, Greater Waterbury OMS
Waterbury, Connecticut

Donald J. Ferguson, DMD, MSD
Dean and Professor of Orthodontics
European University College
Dubai, United Arab Emirates

Roberto L. Flores, MD
Medical Director
Pediatric Craniofacial Center
NYU Langone Medical Center
New York, New York
vii

viii

Contributors

James K. Hartsfield Jr., DMD, MS, MMSc, PhD,
FACMG, FACD, FICD, CDABO
Professor and E. Preston Hicks Endowed Chair in
Orthodontics and Oral Health Research
Director, Center for the Biologic Basis of Oral/Systemic
Diseases Hereditary Genetics/Genomics Core
University of Kentucky
Lexington, Kentucky
Adjunct Professor
Department of Orthodontics and Oral Facial Genetics
Indiana University School of Dentistry
Indianapolis, Indiana
Adjunct Professor
Department of Medical and Molecular Genetics
Indiana University School of Medicine
Indianapolis, Indiana
Adjunct Clinical Professor
Department of Orthodontics
University of Illinois at Chicago College of Dentistry
Chicago, Illinois
Diplomate of the American Board of Orthodontics
Diplomate of the American Board of Medical Genetics
Co-Editor in Chief, Journal of Pediatric Genetics

James E. Jones, DMD, MSD, EdD, PhD
Professor and Chair
Department of Pediatric Dentistry
Indiana University School of Dentistry
Clinical Professor
Department of Pediatrics
Indiana University School of Medicine
Indianapolis, Indiana

Mathew T. Kattadiyil, BDS, MDS, MS
Professor and Director
Advanced Specialty Education Program in
Prosthodontics
Loma Linda University School of Dentistry
Loma Linda, California

Joan E. Kowolik, BDS, LDS, RCS Edin,
Dip. Clin. Hyp.
Director of Predoctoral Pediatric Dentistry
Associate Professor of Pediatric Dentistry
Department of Pediatric Dentistry
Indiana University School of Dentistry
Indianapolis, Indiana

Roberta A. Hibbard, MD

John T. Krull, DDS

Professor of Pediatrics
Director Section of Child Protection Programs
Department of Pediatrics
Indiana of University School of Medicine
Indianapolis, Indiana

Assistant Professor
Department of Pediatric Dentistry
Indiana University School of Dentistry
Private Practice of Orthodontics
Indianapolis, Indiana

Randy A. Hock, MD, PhD, MMM

George E. Krull, DDS

Presbyterian Blume Pediatric Hematology and Oncology
Clinic
Presbyterian Novant Medical Group
Charlotte, North Carolina

Private Practice, Pediatric Dentistry
Clarkston, Michigan

Donald V. Huebener, DDS, MS, MAEd
Professor, Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery
Department of Surgery, School of Medicine
Washington University, St. Louis, Missouri
Professor, Pediatric Dentistry
School of Dental Medicine
Southern Illinois University
Alton, Illinois

Christopher V. Hughes, DMD, PhD
Professor and Chair
Department of Pediatric Dentistry
Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey
Newark, New Jersey

Vanchit John, DDS, MSD, MDS, BDS
Chairman
Department of Periodontics and Allied Dental Programs
Associate Professor
Indiana University School of Dentistry
Indianapolis, Indiana

John J. Manaloor, MD
Assistant Professor of Clinical Pediatrics
Ryan White Center for Pediatric Infectious Diseases
and Global Health
Riley Hospital for Children, Indiana University School
of Medicine
Indianapolis, Indiana

James L. McDonald Jr., PhD
Emeritus Professor of Oral Biology
Indiana University School of Dentistry
Indianapolis, Indiana

John S. McDonald, DDS, MS
Volunteer Professor
Pediatrics/Oral and Maxillofacial Pathology
Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery/Oral and Maxillofacial
Pathology
Anesthesiology/Chronic Head and Neck Pain
University of Cincinnati Neuroscience Institute
Headache and Facial Pain Section
University of Cincinnati College of Medicine
Cincinnati, Ohio

Contributors

Edwin T. Parks, DMD, MS

Jenny I. Stigers, DMD

Professor of Diagnostic Sciences
Indiana University School of Dentistry
Indianapolis, Indiana

Associate Professor
University of Kentucky College of Dentistry
Lexington, Kentucky

Jeffrey A. Platt, DDS, MS

George K. Stookey, MSD, PhD

Associate Professor of Dental Materials
Department of Restorative Dentistry
Indiana University
Indianapolis, Indiana

Distinguished Professor Emeritus
Indiana University School of Dentistry
Indianapolis, Indiana

Laura Romito, DDS, MS
Associate Professor of Oral Biology
Indiana University School of Dentistry
Indianapolis, Indiana

Assistant Professor of Clinical Medicine
IU Child Protection Programs
Indiana University School of Medicine
Indianapolis, Indiana

Brian J. Sanders, DDS, MS

Erwin G. Turner, DMD

Professor of Pediatric Dentistry
Department of Pediatric Dentistry
Indiana University School of Dentistry
Director, Post Graduate Pediatric Program
Department of Pediatric Dentistry
Riley Hospital for Children
Indianapolis, Indiana

Associate Professor and Residency Director
Department of Pediatric Dentistry
University of Kentucky College of Dentistry
Lexington, Kentucky

Mark A. Saxen, DDS, PhD
Adjunct Clinical Associate Professor
Department of Oral Pathology, Medicine and Radiology
Indiana University School of Dentistry
Dentist Anesthesiologist
Indiana Office-Based Anesthesia
Indianapolis, Indiana

Shannon L. Thompson, MD

LaQuia A. Walker Vinson, DDS, MPH
Assistant Professor of Pediatric Dentistry
Indiana University
Indianapolis, Indiana

James A. Weddell, DDS, MSD
Associate Professor of Pediatric Dentistry
Department of Pediatric Dentistry
Indiana University School of Dentistry
Indianapolis, Indiana

Amy D. Shapiro, MD

Julie Weir, BS, CDMP

Medical Director
Indiana Hemophilia and Thrombosis Center
Indianapolis, Indiana

Founder and Consulting Associate
Julie Weir & Associates Dental Practice Management
Consulting
Elizabeth, Colorado

Daniel E. Shin, DDS, MSD
Clinical Assistant Professor
Director of Predoctoral Periodontology
Department of Periodontology
Indiana University School of Dentistry
Indianapolis, Indiana

Ghaeth H. Yassen, BDS, MSD, PhD

Kenneth J. Spolnik, DDS, MSD

Karen M. Yoder, MSD, PhD

Clinical Professor, Chair and Program Director
Department of Endodontics
Indiana University School of Dentistry
Indianapolis, Indiana
Diplomate, American Board of Endodontics
Co-Founder of Indianapolis Endodontics, P.C.

Professor and Director, Civic Engagement and
Health Policy
Department of Preventative and Community Dentistry
Indiana University School of Dentistry
Indianapolis, Indiana

Visiting Assistant Professor
Department of Restorative Dentistry
Indiana University School of Dentistry
Indianapolis, Indiana

ix

Foreword

As we entrust the continuing editions of this textbook to
others, we reflect on the many rewards we have realized by
our participation in the previous editions. The personal rewards have been many but the more important result is the
positive impact that the previous printings have hopefully
had on students, colleagues who teach and/or practice pediatric dentistry, and most importantly their patients.

Dental technology has advanced immeasurably in the
50 years that these publications have been available. At
that time the efficacy of fluoridated dentifrices had recently been recognized as a safe and effective adjunct to
dental caries prevention. Communal water fluoridation
was also relatively new. Both of these exceptional caries prevention services were viewed skeptically by many.

Continued

The late Dr. Ralph E. McDonald (seated) with Dr. Jeffrey A. Dean (left) and Dr. David R. ­Avery
(right), pictured with all nine editions of McDonald and Avery’s Dentistry for the Child and
­Adolescent displayed on the desktop.

xi

xii

Foreword

Today they are accepted by the majority of the scientific
community. Only 30 years ago dental amalgam was still
the mainstay of restorative dentistry, preformed and festooned stainless steel crowns had just been introduced,
and composite resins were in their infancy. Today the
crowns and esthetic materials dominate the restorative
services provided in pediatric dentistry. Similarly, significant changes in the standards of care and the increased
level of our knowledge are reflected in every chapter of
this tenth edition.
The senior members of our profession recognize that
the technologic advancements and accepted practice
norms have dramatically changed our approach to patient
care over the past few decades. Virtually every aspect of
patient therapy has been affected. We also acknowledge
that the advancements are now growing exponentially.
However, the ultimate goal of providing the highest quality service to patients remains the same.
Although our publication goal has been to make a
positive contribution to our profession and ultimately to
its patients, no one has benefited from our efforts more
than we have. Regular new editions required us to update
our base of knowledge from additions in the scientific literature and from exchanging experiences with our colleagues, including students. Constructive suggestions and
criticisms from our colleagues have also strengthened the

textbook from one edition to the next. Other noteworthy
rewards for us have been the many hugs of appreciation
we have received from our own grateful patients as we
provided the care that we espoused.
Listing every individual who has helped us over the
years of these publications is impractical. Suffice it to say
that we are most appreciative to all our colleagues and
students, patients, friends, and family who have supported our efforts in myriad ways.
Finally, we wish Godspeed to Drs. Dean, Jones, Vinson, and all other future contributors as they proceed
with this work of love. We have the utmost confidence in
their abilities to carry on.
Ralph E. McDonald, DDS, MS, LLD*
Dean Emeritus and Professor Emeritus of Pediatric
Dentistry
Indiana University School of Dentistry
Indianapolis, Indiana
David R. Avery, DDS, MSD
Ralph E. McDonald Professor Emeritus of Pediatric
Dentistry
Indiana University School of Dentistry and
James Whitcomb Riley Hospital for Children
Indianapolis, Indiana

*Unfortunately, Dr. McDonald passed away shortly after the
Foreword was written and only months prior to the first printing of the tenth edition. We are all terribly saddened by this
loss and will miss him dearly.

Preface

With this publication of the textbook, we are entering a
historic milestone with the first “double digit” edition of
the title Dentistry for the Child and Adolescent. As I write
this, I am holding Dr. Ralph McDonald’s very first book
entitled Pedodontics: The Postgraduate Dental Lecture Series,
which he developed early in his career as a professor of
pediatric dentistry. This book was published by the CV
Mosby Company in 1963 and had 11 chapters, complemented with 245 illustrations. The copy I am holding
in my hand was Dr. McDonald’s personal copy and has
many handwritten entries in it. What a treasure!
Although his 1963 first text is known by a different title,
it clearly is the foundation of our current series. In fact, all
11 chapter titles in this 1963 edition can be found in some
form or another in the current text. As you may have noticed, this therefore represents the 50th celebratory anniversary for this classic pediatric dentistry textbook. Dr.
McDonald and Dr. David Avery, who joined him in writing the last seven editions, certainly have left their mark
on our specialty with this work, and it’s a unique honor
and pleasure for me to be able to help continue the series
now and hopefully into the future. One can certainly reflect on the perhaps millions of children who these two
grand gentlemen were able to directly assist by continuing to provide the latest theories, research, concepts, and
techniques to practitioners around the world.
So what changes have we made to this edition? First
and foremost is the bowing out of both Drs. McDonald
and Avery as editors of the book. While I stayed in regular communications with them during the production,
they were not actively engaged in writing or editing. Their
involvement was definitely missed by me. In addition,
many other contributors have moved on with retirements
and other life transitions and are no longer involved.
Although we are all sad to see them go, their departure
opened up exciting opportunities for new expert contributors to become involved. And I can say, I was very fortunate to successfully recruit wonderful new authors.

In addition to all of the new contributors to the text,
as well as the electronic version having questions and
answers with each chapter, we have also included a case
study or two for each chapter, as well as 10 video vignettes to enhance the learning experience for students.
These are significant improvements that we hope you will
find most enjoyable. They are available on the Elsevier
Evolve website.
Whereas I am very pleased to point out that we have
rearranged the text into five major areas of focus, I hope
that you will notice that the same excellent chapter titles
are promulgated in this tenth edition. The new five areas of focus will help the practitioner and student as they
organize their thinking and practice around these concepts. In addition to this new organization, we continue
to attempt to replace all illustrations with color and have
made significant improvements in this area.
The fundamental essence of the textbook is retained,
such that the information contained herein remains relevant to the contemporary science and practice of pediatric dentistry. It is designed to help predoctoral and
postdoctoral pediatric dental students provide efficient
and superior comprehensive oral health care to infants,
children, teenagers, and medically compromised patients.
It also provides experienced dentists with reference information regarding new developments and techniques.
Once again, please join me in celebrating the fiftieth
anniversary of this textbook series! In assuming the role
of editor, I hope I have done justice to the previous work
of both Drs. McDonald and Avery. I look forward to receiving feedback from you as you have a chance to peruse
the book and as we look forward to continuing the tradition of excellence in pediatric dental education and practice. My sincerest appreciation to all of our past author
contributors—and especially to our continuing and our
new author contributors—for all of their dedication and
work on this anniversary edition!
Jeffrey A. Dean

xiii

Acknowledgments

A textbook can be planned and written only with the
supportive interest, encouragement, and tangible contributions of many people. Therefore it is a privilege to
acknowledge the assistance of others in the preparation
of this fiftieth anniversary and tenth edition of the text.
First and foremost, of course, I must acknowledge the tremendous contributions and mentorship of both Doctors
Ralph McDonald and David Avery. As I mentioned in the
preface, their contributions to this edition are missed, but
I know that their guidance and mentoring of me during
my contributions over the last four editions helped me
tremendously as I assumed my new role as chief editor.
They both served as tremendous role models and supporters throughout my career.
Next, I wish to acknowledge the contributions of my
two associate editors, Dr. James Jones and Dr. LaQuia Vinson. Dr. Jones has contributed to this textbook for many
editions, and in particular in this past edition has done
anything I’ve asked to help make sure that we provided a
timely and relevant product. Dr. Vinson is a new contributor, brings fresh perspectives, and in particular worked
diligently on various aspects of the book. In addition, I’d
like to thank Dr. Juan Yepes for taking on the task of making multiple video vignettes that will complement the
online version of the textbook.
I would certainly like to take the opportunity to
thank the many authors and co-authors who made this
tenth edition possible. Specifically, I need to thank and
acknowledge the contributions in previous editions by
authors who did not participate this time: Drs. Gerald
Wright, Dale Miles, David Bixler†, Murray Dock, Keith

Moore, Robert Feigal†, Robert Cronin, Charles Goodacre,
Thomas Lapp, Ronald Bell†, Michael Sadove, Ann Page
Griffin, Jasper Lewis, and Charles Hutton. My hat’s off to
them for their previous contributions! In addition, special
recognition goes to Dr. Rolando DeCastro for his many
wonderful illustrations and cover art over the years. Donna Bumgardner once again provided manuscript preparation and valuable editorial assistance for our work, including serving as a bit of a taskmaster to make sure we
stayed on track. Mark Dirlam, Kyla Jones, Terry Wilson,
and Tim Centers provided assistance with new illustrations. We also gratefully acknowledge the professional
staff at Elsevier who has provided valuable assistance and
superb guidance in the preparation of this tenth edition,
with special thanks to Kathy Falk, executive content specialist; Brian Loehr, senior content development specialist; and Sharon Corell, senior project manager. The faculties of pediatric dentistry and other disciplines at Indiana
University have contributed substantially to this work in
many ways. We truly appreciate their willingness to share
information relevant to scientific accuracy of the manuscripts. Many pediatric dentistry postdoctoral students
and auxiliary staff also assisted in numerous ways.
With this special anniversary edition I would like to
take the privilege and follow the lead of Dr. McDonald, as
he did in his very first edition of this series back in 1963,
to thank my family for their patience, love, and support
throughout this project and always.

Jeffrey A. Dean

†Deceased

xv

PART

1

CHAPTER

1

DIAGNOSES

Examination of the Mouth
and Other Relevant Structures
s Jeffrey A. Dean

For additional resources, please visit the

website.

CHAPTER OUTLINE
EMERGENCY DENTAL TREATMENT
INITIAL PARENTAL CONTACT WITH
THE DENTAL OFFICE
THE DIAGNOSTIC METHOD
PRELIMINARY MEDICAL AND
DENTAL HISTORY
CLINICAL EXAMINATION
TEMPOROMANDIBULAR
EVALUATION

UNIFORM DENTAL RECORDING
RADIOGRAPHIC EXAMINATION
EARLY EXAMINATION
INFANT DENTAL CARE
DETECTION OF SUBSTANCE ABUSE
Etiologic Factors in Substance Abuse
Specific Substances and Frequency
of Use

EMERGENCY DENTAL TREATMENT
A dentist is traditionally taught to perform a complete
oral examination of the patient and to develop a treatment plan based on the examination findings. The
­dentist then makes a case presentation to the patient or
parents, outlining the recommended course of treatment.
This process should include the development and presentation of a prevention plan that outlines an ongoing comprehensive oral health care program for the patient and
establishment of the “dental home.”
The plan should include recommendations designed to
correct existing oral problems (or halt their progression)
and to prevent anticipated future problems. It is essential
to obtain all relevant patient and family information, to
secure parental consent, and to perform a complete examination before embarking on this comprehensive oral
health care program for the pediatric patient. Anticipatory
guidance is the term often used to describe the discussion
and implementation of such a plan with the patient and/
or parents. The American Academy of Pediatric Dentistry
has published guidelines1 concerning the periodicity of
examination, preventive dental services, and oral treatment for children as summarized in Table 1-1.
Each pediatric patient should be given an opportunity
to receive complete dental care. The dentist should not

SUICIDAL TENDENCIES IN CHILDREN
AND ADOLESCENTS
INFECTION CONTROL IN THE
DENTAL OFFICE
Biofilm
EMERGENCY DENTAL TREATMENT

attempt to decide what the child, the parents, or a thirdparty agent will accept or can afford. If parents reject a
portion or all of the recommendations, the dentist has at
least fulfilled the obligation of educating the child and the
parents about the importance of the recommended procedures. Parents with even moderate income usually find
the means to have oral health care performed if the dentist
explains that the child’s future oral health and even general health are related to the correction of the oral defects.

INITIAL PARENTAL CONTACT WITH
THE DENTAL OFFICE
We most often think of parents’ first contact with the
dental office as being by telephone. This initial conversation between the parent and the office receptionist is very
important. It provides the first opportunity for the receptionist to attend to the parents’ concerns by pleasantly
and concisely responding to questions and by offering an
office appointment. The receptionist must have a warm,
friendly voice and the ability to communicate clearly. The
receptionist’s responses should assure the parent that the
well-being of the child is the chief concern.
The information recorded by the receptionist during
this conversation constitutes the initial dental record for
the patient. Filling out a patient information form is a
1

2

Chapter 1

n

Examination of the Mouth and Other Relevant Structures

Table 1-1
Recommendations for Pediatric Oral Health Assessment, Preventive Services, and Anticipatory
Guidance/Counseling
Since each child is unique, these recommendations are designed for the care of children who have no contributing
medical conditions and are developing normally. These recommendations will need to be modified for children with
special health care needs or if disease or trauma manifests variations from normal. The American Academy of Pediatric
Dentistry (AAPD) emphasizes the importance of very early professional intervention and the continuity of care based
on the individualized needs of the child. Refer to the text of this guideline for supporting information and references.
Refer to the text in the Guidelines on Periodicity of Examinations, Preventive Dental Services, Anticipatory Guidance,
and Oral Treatment for Infants, Children, and Adolescents (www.aapd.org/media/Policies_Guidelines/G_Periodicity
.pdf) for supporting information and references.
American Academy of Pediatric Dentistry
Clinical oral examination1
Assesses oral growth and development2
Caries-risk assessment3
Radiographic assessment4
Prophylaxis and topical fluoride3,4
Fluoride supplementation5
Anticipatory guidance/counseling6
Oral hygiene counseling7
Dietary counseling8
Injury prevention counseling9
Counseling for nonnutritive habits10
Counseling for speech/language development
Assessment and treatment of developing
malocclusion
Assessment for pit and fissure sealants11
Substance abuse counseling
Counseling for intraoral/perioral piercing
Assessment and/or removal of third molars
Transition to adult dental care

AGE
6 to 12
months
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
Parent
•
•
•
•

12 to 24
months
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
Parent
•
•
•
•

2 to 6
years
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
Patient/
parent
•
•
•
•
•

6 to 12
years
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
Patient/
parent
•
•
•
•
•

12 years
and older
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
Patient

•

•
•
•

•
•
•
•
•

•
•
•
•
•

1First examination at the eruption of the first tooth and no later than 12 months. Repeat every 6 months or as indicated by child’s risk status/
susceptibility to disease. Includes assessment of pathology and injuries.
2By clinical examination.
3Must be repeated regularly and frequently to maximize effectiveness.
4Timing, selection, and frequency determined by child’s history, clinical findings, and susceptibility to oral disease.
5Consider when systemic fluoride exposure is suboptimal. Up to at least 16 years of age or later in high-risk patients.
6Appropriate discussion and counseling should be an integral part of each visit for care.
7Initially, responsibility of parent; as child matures, jointly with parent; then, when indicated, only child.
8At every appointment; initially discuss appropriate feeding practices, followed by the role of refined carbohydrates and frequency of snacking
in caries development and childhood obesity.
9Initially for play objects, pacifiers, car seats; then while learning to walk; and then with sports and routine playing, including the importance
of mouthguards.
10At first, discuss the need for additional sucking: digits vs. pacifiers; then the need to wean from the habit before malocclusion or skeletal
dysplasia occurs. For school-aged children and adolescent patients, counsel regarding any existing habits such as fingernail biting, clenching,
or bruxism.
11For caries-susceptible primary molars, permanent molars, premolars, and anterior teeth with deep pits and fissures; placed as soon as possible after eruption.

Chapter 1

convenient method of collecting the necessary initial information. Of course, most dental practices are moving
toward online, website-driven information and completion of patient forms for use even before a parent calls an
office for an appointment or schedules an appointment
online. Practices need to make accommodations to their
patient information systems to manage these very productive changes.

THE DIAGNOSTIC METHOD
Before making a diagnosis and developing a treatment
plan, the dentist must collect and evaluate the facts associated with the patient’s or parents’ chief concern and any
other identified problems that may be unknown to the
patient or parents. Some pathognomonic signs may lead
to an almost immediate diagnosis. For example, obvious
gingival swelling and drainage may be associated with a
single, badly carious primary molar. Although these associated facts are collected and evaluated rapidly, they
provide a diagnosis only for a single problem area. On
the other hand, a comprehensive diagnosis of all of the
patient’s problems or potential problems may sometimes
need to be postponed until more urgent conditions are resolved. For example, a patient with necrotizing ulcerative
gingivitis or a newly fractured crown needs immediate
treatment, but the treatment will likely be only palliative,
and further diagnostic and treatment procedures will be
required later.
The importance of thorough collection and evaluation
of the facts concerning a patient’s condition cannot be
overemphasized. A thorough examination of the pediatric dental patient includes an assessment of the following:
  
• General growth and health
• Chief complaint, such as pain
• Extraoral soft tissue and temporomandibular joint
evaluation
• Intraoral soft tissue
• Oral hygiene and periodontal health
• Intraoral hard tissue
• Developing occlusion
• Caries risk
• Behavior
  
Additional diagnostic aids are often also required, such
as radiographs, study models, photographs, pulp tests,
and, infrequently, laboratory tests. In certain unusual
­cases, all of these diagnostic aids may be necessary before
a comprehensive diagnosis can be made. Certainly no
oral diagnosis can be complete unless the diagnostician
has evaluated the facts obtained by medical and dental
history taking, inspection, palpation, exploration (if teeth
are present), and often imaging (e.g., radiographs). For a
more thorough review of evaluation of the dental patient,
refer to the chapter by Glick, Greenberg, and Ship in Burket’s Oral Medicine.2

PRELIMINARY MEDICAL AND DENTAL
HISTORY
It is important for the dentist to be familiar with the medical and dental history of the pediatric patient. Familial

n

Examination of the Mouth and Other Relevant Structures

3

history may also be relevant to the patient’s oral condition and may provide important diagnostic information
in some hereditary disorders. Before the dentist examines
the child, the dental assistant can obtain sufficient information to provide the dentist with knowledge of the
child’s general health and can alert the dentist to the need
for obtaining additional information from the parent or
the child’s physician. The form illustrated in Figure 1-1
can be completed by the parent. However, it is more
effective for the dental assistant to ask the questions
­
­informally and then to present the findings to the dentist and offer personal observations and a summary of the
case. The questions included on the form will also provide ­information about any previous dental treatment.
Information regarding the child’s social and psychological development is important. Accurate information
reflecting a child’s learning, behavioral, or communication problems is sometimes difficult to obtain initially,
especially when the parents are aware of their child’s developmental disorder but are reluctant to discuss it. Behavior problems in the dental office are often related to
the child’s inability to communicate with the dentist and
to follow instructions. This inability may be attributable
to a learning disorder. An indication of learning disorders can usually be obtained by the dental assistant when
asking questions about the child’s learning process; for
example, asking a young school-aged child how he or she
is doing in school is a good lead question. The questions
should be age-appropriate for the child.
If a young child was hospitalized previously for general anesthetic and surgical procedures, it should be noted.
Hospitalization and procedures involving general anesthesia can be a traumatic psychological experience for a
preschool child and may sensitize the youngster to procedures that will be encountered later in a dental office.3 If
the dentist is aware that a child was previously hospitalized or that the child fears strangers in clinic attire, the
necessary time and procedures can be planned to help the
child overcome the fear and accept dental treatment.
Occasionally, when the parents report significant disorders, it is best for the dentist to conduct the medical
and dental history interview. When the parents meet
with the dentist privately, they are more likely to discuss
the child’s problems openly, and there is less chance for
misunderstandings regarding the nature of the disorders.
In addition, the dentist’s personal involvement at this
early time strengthens the parents’ confidence. When an
acute or chronic systemic disease or anomaly is indicated,
the dentist should consult the child’s physician to learn
the status of the condition, the long-range prognosis, and
the current drug therapy.
When a patient’s medical and dental history is recorded, the presence of current illnesses or history of relevant
disorders signals the need for special attention. In addition to consulting the child’s physician, the dentist may
decide to record additional data concerning the child’s
current physical condition, such as blood pressure, body
temperature, heart sounds, height and weight, pulse, and
respiration. Before treatment is initiated, certain laboratory tests may be indicated, and special precautions
may be necessary. A decision to provide treatment in a

4

Chapter 1

n

Examination of the Mouth and Other Relevant Structures

U
Y
S
T
C
Y
E
R
T
S
R
T
A
R
T
S
E
A
C
V
T
O
D
N
N
YP
S
TY
CD
YA
ES
RY
TE
SIIIT
RIIIC
TR
AT
RS
TR
ST
ER
AT
CIIIA
VE
TIIIS
OC
DIIIA
NT
UN
NIIIV
PEEED
DEEEN
ASSSSSSO

Riley Hospital for Children IU Health | ROC | Pediatric Dentistry
705 Riley Hospital Drive, Room #4205
Indianapolis, IN 46202-5109
317.944.3865 office | 317.944.9653 fax
www.pediatricdentistryassociates.org

DOB:

EDR:

NA:
LC:

DATE:

MEDICAL / DENTAL HISTORY
Paent Name:
City & State of Birth:
Primary Care Physician:
Physician Address:
Physician Phone:
Date of Last Medical Exam:

Birth Date:
Race:
Previous Denst:
Denst Phone:
Last Dental Visit:
Last Dental X-rays:

Gender: Female Male
Height:_______ Weight____

Dental History:
What is the primary reason for today’s visit?
Is paent in pain?
YES NO
Explain:
Has paent had an injury to the mouth, teeth, or jaw? YES NO Explain:
What is paent’s primary water source:  Private Well
 City Water, City Name:
Was/is paent
 Breased or
 Bole-fed
Unl what age? Breased:
How oen does paent brush teeth?
With Help Without Help
Does paent…
Yes / No
Yes / No

 Suck Thumb/Fingers

 Bite/Chew Finger Nails

 Use Pacifier

 Have Speech Issues
Medical History:
Is paent currently under the care of a doctor?
Does paent have allergies?
Is paent taking medicaons?
Medicaon Name:

Has paent had surgery or been hospitalized?
Hospital Facility:

YES
YES
YES

NO
NO
NO
Dose:

YES

NO
When:

Does paent have / or had any of the following:
Yes / No

 Congenital Heart Defect/Disease

 Heart Surgery

 Heart Murmur

 High Blood Pressure

 Rheumac Fever

 Asthma/Breathing Issues

 Cerebral Palsy

 Seizures/Convulsions/Epilepsy

 Learning/Communicaon Problems

 Ausm

 ADD/ADHD

Other:
Bole-fed:
How oen does paent floss?
Yes / No

 Clench/Grind Teeth

 Mouth Breather

Explain:
Explain:
Please list all medicaons and natural remedies. Addional items may be listed on the back
Frequency of Use:

Reason:

Yes / No

 Visual/Hearing Impairment

 Abnormal Bleeding Issues

 Sickle Cell Trait/Disease

 Hemophilia

 Anemia

 Kidney Problems

 Liver Problems

 Diabetes

 Muscle/Joint/Bone Problems

 Thyroid/Glandular Problems

 Skin Problems / Hives / Cold Sores

Yes / No

 Failure to Thrive

 Eang Disorders

 Born Prematurely

 Immunizaons

 Hepas A, B, C

 Blood/Blood Product Transfusion

 HIV/AIDS

 Varicella Vaccine / Chicken Pox

 TB / Tuberculosis

 MRSA

 Limited Mobility

I affirm that the informaon provided above is correct to the best of my knowledge. It will be held in confidence and it is my responsibility to inform this
office if there is a change in the health history of this paent. I authorize the release of this informaon to addional healthcare providers as is necessary for
the dental treatments of this paent.
Guardian Signature:
Resident Signature:

Relaonship to Paent:
Date:

Time:
Form #UPDDR217 Rev. 12/2013

Figure 1-1 Form used in completing the preliminary medical and dental history. (Printed with permission from Indiana Univer-

sity–University Pediatric Dentistry Associates.)

Chapter 1

­ ospital that possibly involves general anesthesia may be
h
­appropriate.
The dentist and the staff must also be alert to identify potentially communicable infectious conditions that threaten the health of the patient and others. Knowledge of the
current recommended childhood immunization schedule
is helpful. It is advisable to postpone nonemergency dental care for a patient exhibiting signs or ­symptoms of acute
infectious disease until the patient recovers. Further discussions of management of dental patients with special
medical, physical, or behavioral problems are presented in
Parts III and V.
The pertinent facts of the medical history can be transferred to the oral examination record (Fig. 1-2) for easy
reference by the dentist. A brief summary of important
medical information serves as a convenient reminder to
the dentist and the staff, who will refer to this chart at
each treatment visit.
The patient’s dental history should also be summarized on the examination chart. This should include
a record of previous care in the dentist’s office and the
facts related by the patient and parent(s) regarding previous care, if any, in another office. Information concerning the patient’s current oral hygiene habits and previous
and current fluoride exposure helps the dentist develop
an effective dental disease prevention program. For example, if the family drinks well water, a sample may be
sent to a water analysis laboratory to determine the fluoride ­concentration.

CLINICAL EXAMINATION
Most facts needed for a comprehensive oral diagnosis
in the young patient are obtained by thorough clinical
and radiographic examination. In addition to examining the oral cavity structures, the dentist may in some
cases wish to note the patient’s size, stature, gait, or involuntary movements. The first clue to malnutrition may
come from observing a patient’s abnormal size or stature.
Similarly, the severity of a child’s illness, even if oral in
origin, may be recognized by observing a weak, unsteady
gait of lethargy and malaise as the patient walks into the
office. All relevant information should be noted on the
oral examination record (see Fig. 1-2), which becomes a
permanent part of the patient’s chart.
The clinical examination, whether the first examination
or a regular recall examination, should be all-inclusive.
The dentist can gather useful information while getting
acquainted with a new patient. Attention to the patient’s
hair, head, face, neck, and hands should be among the first
observations made by the dentist after the patient is seated
in the chair.
The patient’s hands may reveal information pertinent
to a comprehensive diagnosis. The dentist may first detect
an elevated temperature by holding the patient’s hand.
Cold, clammy hands or bitten fingernails may be the first
indication of abnormal anxiety in the child. A callused or
unusually clean digit suggests a persistent sucking habit.
Clubbing of the fingers or a bluish color in the nail beds
suggests congenital heart disease, which may require special precautions during dental treatment.

n

Examination of the Mouth and Other Relevant Structures

5

Inspection and palpation of the patient’s head and
neck are also indicated. Unusual characteristics of the hair
or skin should be noted. The dentist may observe signs of
problems such as head lice (Fig. 1-3), ringworm (Fig. 1-4),
or impetigo (Fig. 1-5) during the examination. Proper referral is indicated immediately, because these conditions
are contagious. After the child’s physician has supervised
treatment to control the condition, the child’s dental appointment may be rescheduled. If a contagious condition
is identified but the child also has a dental emergency, the
dentist and the staff must take appropriate precautions to
prevent spread of the disease to others while the emergency is alleviated. Further treatment should be postponed
until the contagious condition is controlled.
Variations in the size, shape, symmetry, or function
of the head and neck structures should be recorded.
Abnormalities of these structures may indicate various syndromes or conditions associated with oral abnormalities.

TEMPOROMANDIBULAR EVALUATION
Okeson4 published a special report on temporomandibular disorders in children. Okeson indicated that, although
several studies included children 5 to 7 years of age, most
observations have been made in young adolescents. Studies have placed the findings into the categories of symptoms or signs—those reported by the child or parents and
those identified by the dentist during the examination.
Prevalence of signs and symptoms increases with age and
may occur in 30% of patients.
One should evaluate temporomandibular joint (TMJ)
function by palpating the head of each mandibular
condyle and by observing the patient while the mouth
is closed (teeth clenched), at rest, and in various open
positions (Fig. 1-6, A, B). Movements of the condyles or
jaw that do not flow smoothly or that deviate from the
expected norm should be noted. Similarly, any crepitus
that may be heard or identified by palpation as well as
any other abnormal sounds should be noted. Sore masticatory muscles may also signal TMJ dysfunction. Such
deviations from normal TMJ function may require further
evaluation and treatment. There is a consensus that temporomandibular disorders in children can be managed
effectively by the following conservative and reversible
therapies: patient education, mild physical therapy, behavioral therapy, medications, and occlusal splints.5
Discussion of the diagnosis and treatment of complex
TMJ disorders is available from many sources; we suggest
Okeson’s Management of Temporomandibular Disorders and
Occlusion (2013).6
The extraoral examination continues with palpation of
the patient’s neck and submandibular area (see Fig. 1-6,
C, D). Again, deviations from normal, such as unusual
tenderness or enlargement, should be noted and followup tests performed or referrals made as indicated.
If the child is old enough to talk, speech should be
evaluated. The positions of the tongue, lips, and perioral
musculature during speech, while swallowing, and at rest
may provide useful diagnostic information.
The intraoral examination of a pediatric patient should
be comprehensive. There is a temptation to look first for

6

Chapter 1

n

Examination of the Mouth and Other Relevant Structures

Figure 1-2 Chart used to record the oral findings and the treatment proposed for the pediatric patient. (Printed with

­permission from Indiana University–University Pediatric Dentistry Associates.)

Chapter 1

n

Examination of the Mouth and Other Relevant Structures

Figure 1-2, cont’d

7

8

Chapter 1

n

Examination of the Mouth and Other Relevant Structures

Figure 1-3 Evidence of head lice infestation. Usually the

insects are not seen, but their eggs or nits cling to hair
filaments until they hatch. (Courtesy Dr. Hala Henderson.)

Figure 1-4 Lesion on the forehead above the left eyebrow

is caused by ringworm infection. Several fungal species
may cause lesions on various areas of the body. The dentist
may identify lesions on the head, face, or neck of a patient
during a routine clinical examination. (Courtesy Dr. Hala
Henderson.)

obvious carious lesions. Although controlling carious lesions is important, the dentist should first evaluate the
condition of the oral soft tissues and the status of the developing occlusion. If the soft tissues and the occlusion
are not observed early in the examination, the dentist
may become so engrossed in charting carious lesions and
in planning for their restoration that other important
anomalies in the mouth are overlooked. In addition, any
unusual breath odors and abnormal quantity or consistency of saliva should also be noted.
The buccal tissues, lips, floor of the mouth, palate, and
gingivae should be carefully inspected and palpated (Fig.
1-7). The use of the periodontal screening and recording
program (PSR) is often a helpful adjunct when working
with children. PSR is designed to facilitate early detection of periodontal diseases with a simplified probing
technique and minimal documentation. Clerehugh and
Tugnait7 recommend initiation of periodontal screening
in children following eruption of the permanent incisors and the first molars. They suggest routine screening
in these children at the child’s first appointment and at
regular recare appointments so that periodontal problems
are detected early and treated appropriately. Immunodeficient children are especially vulnerable to early loss of
bone support.
A more detailed periodontal evaluation is occasionally
indicated, even in young children. Periodontal disorders
of children are discussed further in Chapter 14.
The tongue and oropharynx should be closely inspected. Enlarged tonsils accompanied by purulent exudate
may be the initial sign of a streptococcal infection, which
can lead to rheumatic fever. When streptococcal throat
infection is suspected, immediate referral to the child’s
physician is indicated. In some cases it may be helpful to
the physician and convenient for the dentist to obtain
a throat culture specimen while the child is still in the
dental office, which contributes to an earlier definitive diagnosis of the infection. The diagnosis and treatment of
soft tissue problems are discussed throughout this book
(see Chapters 3, 27, and 28.)
After thoroughly examining the oral soft tissues, the
dentist should inspect the occlusion and note any dental
or skeletal irregularities. The dentition and resulting occlusion may undergo considerable change during childhood
and early adolescence. This dynamic developmental process occurs in all three planes of space, and with periodic
evaluation the dentist can intercept and favorably influence undesirable changes. The patient’s facial profile and
symmetry; molar, canine, and anterior segment relationships; dental midlines; and relation of arch length to tooth
mass should be routinely monitored in the clinical examination. More detailed evaluation and analysis are indicated when significant discrepancies are found during critical
stages of growth and development. Diagnostic casts and
cephalometric analyses may be indicated relatively early in
the mixed-dentition stage and sometimes in the primary
dentition. Detailed discussions of analyses of developing
occlusions and interceptive treatment recommendations
are presented in Chapters 20, 21, and 22.
Finally, the teeth should be inspected carefully for
evidence of carious lesions and hereditary or acquired

Chapter 1

A

n

Examination of the Mouth and Other Relevant Structures

B

Figure 1-5 Characteristic lesions of impetigo on the lower face (A) and on the right ear (B). These lesions occur on various
skin surfaces, but the dentist is most likely to encounter them on upper body areas. The infections are of bacterial (usually
streptococcal) origin and generally require antibiotic therapy for control. The child often spreads the infection by scratching
the lesions. (Courtesy Dr. Hala Henderson.)

A

B

C

D

Figure 1-6 A and B, Observation and palpation of temporomandibular joint function. C and D, Palpation of the neck and

submandibular areas.

9

10

Chapter 1

n

Examination of the Mouth and Other Relevant Structures

B

A

C
Figure 1-7 Inspection and palpation of the buccal tissues (A), the lips (B), and the floor of the mouth (C).

anomalies. The teeth should also be counted and identified individually to ensure that supernumerary or missing teeth are recognized. Identification of caries lesions is
important in patients of all ages but is especially critical
in young patients because the lesions may progress rapidly in early childhood if not controlled. Eliminating the
etiology of the caries activity, preventive management of
the caries process, and restoration of cavitated lesions will
prevent pain and the spread of infection and will contribute to the stability of the developing occlusion.
Since it is preferable for the dentist to perform the
clinical examination of a new pediatric patient before
the radiographic and prophylaxis procedures, it may be
necessary to correlate radiographic findings or other initially questionable findings with the findings of a second
brief oral examination. This is especially true when the
new patient has poor oral hygiene. Detailed inspection
and exploration of the teeth and soft tissues cannot be
performed adequately until the mouth is free of extraneous debris.
During the clinical examination for carious lesions,
each tooth should be dried individually and inspected
under a good light. A definite routine for the examination
should be established. For example, a dentist may always

start in the upper right quadrant, work around the maxillary arch, move down to the lower left quadrant, and
end the examination in the lower right quadrant. Morphologic defects and incomplete coalescence of enamel
at the bases of pits and fissures in molar teeth can often
be detected readily by visual and explorer examination
after the teeth have been cleaned and dried. The decision
whether to place a sealant or to restore a defect depends
on the patient’s history of dental caries, the parents’
or patient’s acceptance of a comprehensive preventive
dentistry program (including dietary and oral hygiene
­
control), and the patient’s dependability in returning for
recare appointments.
In patients with severe dental caries, caries activity
tests and diet analysis may contribute to the diagnostic process by helping define specific etiologic factors.
These procedures probably have an even greater value in
helping the patient and/or parents understand the caries disease process and in motivating them to make the
behavioral changes needed to control the disease. The information provided to them should include instruction
in plaque control and the appropriate recommendations
for fluoride exposure. Dental caries susceptibility, the caries disease process, caries activity tests, diet analysis, and

Chapter 1

caries control are discussed in Chapter 9. Plaque control
procedures and instructions are detailed in Chapter 7.
The dentist’s comprehensive diagnosis depends on
the completion of numerous procedures but requires a
thorough, systematic, and critical clinical examination.
Any deviation from the expected or desired size, shape,
color, and consistency of soft or hard tissues should be described in detail. The severity of associated problems and
their causes must be clearly identified to the patient or
parents before a comprehensive oral health care program
can be expected to succeed.
During the initial examination and at subsequent
appointments, the dentist and auxiliary staff members
should be alert to signs and symptoms of child abuse and
neglect. These problems are increasing in prevalence,
and the dentist can play an important role in detecting
their signs and symptoms; Chapter 6 is devoted to this
subject.

UNIFORM DENTAL RECORDING
Many different tooth-charting systems are currently in
use, including the universal system illustrated in the hard
tissue examination section of Figure 1-2. This system of
marking permanent teeth uses the numbers 1 to 32, beginning with the upper right third molar (No. 1) and
progressing around the arch to the upper left third molar
(No. 16), down to the lower left third molar (No. 17), and
around the arch to the lower right third molar (No. 32).
The primary teeth are identified in the universal system
by the first 20 letters of the alphabet, A through T.
The Fédération Dentaire Internationale’s Special Committee on Uniform Dental Recording has specified the
following basic requirements for a tooth-charting system:
1.	Simple to understand and teach
2.	Easy to pronounce in conversation and dictation
3.	Readily communicable in print and by wire
4.	Easy to translate into computer input
5.	Easily adaptable to standard charts used in general
practice
The committee found that only one system, the twodigit system, seems to comply with these requirements.
According to this system, the first digit indicates the
quadrant and the second digit the type of tooth within
the quadrant. Quadrants are allotted the digits 1 to 4 for
the permanent teeth and 5 to 8 for the primary teeth in a
clockwise sequence, starting at the upper right side; teeth
within the same quadrant are allotted the digits 1 to 8
(primary teeth, 1 to 5) from the midline backward. The
digits should be pronounced separately; thus the permanent canines are teeth one-three, two-three, three-three,
and four-three.
In the “Treatment Proposed” section of the oral examination record (see Fig. 1-2), the individual teeth that
require restorative procedures, endodontic therapy, or
extraction are listed. Gingival areas requiring follow-up
therapy are also noted. A checkmark can be placed beside each listed tooth and procedure as the treatment is
completed. Additional notations concerning treatment
procedures completed and the date are recorded on supplemental treatment record pages.

n

Examination of the Mouth and Other Relevant Structures

11

RADIOGRAPHIC EXAMINATION
When indicated, radiographic examination for children
must be completed before a comprehensive oral health
care plan can be developed, and subsequent radiographs
are required periodically to enable detection of incipient
caries lesions or other developing anomalies.
A child should be exposed to dental ionizing radiation
only after the dentist has determined that radiography
is necessary to make an adequate diagnosis for the individual child at the time of the appointment.
Obtaining isolated occlusal, periapical, or bite-wing
films is sometimes indicated in very young children (even
infants) because of trauma, toothache, suspected developmental disturbances, or proximal caries. It should be
remembered that carious lesions appear smaller on radiographs than they actually are.
As early as 1967, Blayney and Hill8 recognized the importance of diagnosing incipient proximal carious lesions
with the appropriate use of radiographs. If the pediatric
patient can be motivated to adopt a routine of good oral
hygiene supported by competent supervision, many of
these initial lesions can be arrested.
Radiographic techniques for the pediatric patient are
described in detail in Chapter 2.

EARLY EXAMINATION
Historically, dental care for children has been designed
primarily to prevent oral pain and infection, occurrence
and progression of dental caries, premature loss of primary teeth, loss of arch length, and development of an
association between fear and dental care. The dentist is responsible for guiding the child and parents, resolving oral
disorders before they can affect health and dental alignment, and preventing oral disease. The goals of pediatric
dental care are therefore primarily preventive. The dentist’s opportunity to conduct an initial oral examination
and parental consultation during the patient’s infancy is
a key element in achieving and maintaining these goals.
Some dentists, especially pediatric dentists, like to
counsel expectant parents before their child is born. They
consider it appropriate to discuss with expectant mothers
the importance of good nutrition during pregnancy and
practices that can influence the expected child’s general
and dental health.
It is also appropriate to inquire about medication that
the expectant mother is taking. For example, prolonged
ingestion of tetracyclines may result in discolored, pigmented, and even hypoplastic primary teeth.
The expectant mother should be encouraged to visit
her dentist and to have all caries lesions restored. The
presence of active dental caries and accompanying high
levels of Streptococcus mutans can lead to transmission by
the mother to the infant and may be responsible for the
development of caries lesions at a very early age.
It is not intended that the pediatric dentist usurp the
responsibility of the expectant mother’s physician in recommending dietary practices; rather, the dentist should
reinforce good nutritional recommendations provided by
medical colleagues.

12

Chapter 1

n

Examination of the Mouth and Other Relevant Structures

INFANT DENTAL CARE
The infant oral health care visit should be seen as the
foundation on which a lifetime of preventive education
and dental care can be built to help ensure optimal oral
health into childhood. Oral examination, anticipatory
guidance including preventive education, and appropriate therapeutic intervention for the infant can enhance
the opportunity for a lifetime of freedom from preventable oral disease. The 2013 American Academy of Pediatric Dentistry guidelines on infant oral health care included the following recommendations:
1.	All primary health care professionals who serve
mothers and infants should provide parent/caregiver
education on the etiology and prevention of early
childhood caries (ECC).
2.	The infectious and transmissible nature of bacteria that cause ECC and methods of oral health risk
assessment (e.g., Caries Assessment Tool [CAT]),
anticipatory guidance, and early intervention should
be included in the curriculum of all medical, nursing,
and allied health professional programs.
3.	Every infant should receive an oral health risk assessment from his or her primary health care provider or
qualified health care professional by 6 months of age.
4.	Parents or caregivers should establish a dental home
for infants by 12 months of age.
5.	Health care professionals and all stakeholders in children’s health should support the identification of a
dental home for all infants at 12 months of age.
Thus it is appropriate for a dentist to perform an oral
examination for an infant of any age, even a newborn,
and an examination is recommended anytime the parent or physician calls with questions concerning the appearance of an infant’s oral tissues. Even when there are
no known problems, the child’s first dental visit and oral
examination should take place by at least 1 year of age.
This early dental visit enables the dentist and parents to
discuss ways to nurture excellent oral health before any
serious problems have had an opportunity to develop.
An adequate oral examination for an infant is generally
simple and brief, but it may be the important first step
toward a lifetime of excellent oral health.
Some dentists may prefer to “preside” during the entire
first session with the infant and parents. Others may wish
to delegate some of the educational aspects of the session
to auxiliary members of the office staff and then conduct
the examination and answer any unresolved questions.
In either case, it is sometimes necessary to have an assistant available to help hold the child’s attention so that
the parents can concentrate on the important information being provided.
It is not always necessary to conduct the infant oral
examination in the dental operatory, but it should take
place where there is adequate light for a visual examination. The dentist may find it convenient to conduct the
examination in the private consultation room during
the initial meeting with the child and parents. The examination procedures may include only direct observation and digital palpation. However, if primary molars
have erupted or if hand instruments may be needed, the

­examination should be performed in an area where instrument transfers between the dental assistant and the
dentist can proceed smoothly.
The parents should be informed before the examination that it will be necessary to restrain the child gently
and that it is normal for the child to cry during the procedure. The infant is held on the lap of a parent, usually the
mother. This direct involvement of the parent provides
emotional support to the child and allows the parent to
help restrain the child. Both parents may participate or at
least be present during the examination.
The dentist should make a brief attempt to get acquainted with the infant and to project warmth and caring.
­However, many infants and toddlers are not particularly interested in developing new friendships with strangers, and
the dentist should not be discouraged if the infant shuns
the friendly approach. Even if the child chooses to resist
(which is common and normal), only negligible extra effort
is necessary to perform the examination procedure. The
dentist should not be flustered by the crying and resistant
behavior and should proceed unhurriedly but efficiently
with the examination. The dentist’s voice should remain
unstrained and pleasant during the examination. The dentist’s behavior should reassure the child and alleviate the
parents’ anxiety concerning this first dental procedure.
One method of performing the examination in a private
consultation area is illustrated in Figure 1-8, A. The dentist and the parent are seated face to face with their knees
touching. Their upper legs form the “examination table”
for the child. The child’s legs straddle the parent’s body,
which allows the parent to restrain the child’s legs and
hands (Video 1-1: Examination of the mouth). An assistant
is present to record the dentist’s examination findings as
they are dictated and to help restrain the child if needed.
If adequate space is available in the consultation area, the
approach illustrated in Figure 1-8, B, may be useful. The
dental assistant is seated at a desk or writing stand near the
child’s feet. The dental assistant and the parent are facing
the same direction, side by side and at a right angle to the
direction that the dentist is facing. The dental assistant is
in a good position to hear and record the dentist’s findings
as they are dictated, even if the child is crying loudly. These
positions (see Fig. 1-8) are also convenient for demonstrating oral hygiene procedures to the parents.
The positions of the dentist, parent, child, and dental
assistant during the examination at the dental chair are
illustrated in Figure 1-9. The dental assistant is seated higher to permit good visibility and to better anticipate the dentist’s needs. The assistant is also in a good position to hear
and record the dentist’s findings. The parent and the dental assistant restrain the child’s arms and legs. The child’s
head is positioned in the bend of the parent’s arm. The
dentist establishes a chairside position so that not only the
dentist’s hands but also the lower arms and abdomen may
be available for support of the child’s head, if necessary.
The infant oral examination may often be performed by
careful direct observation and digital palpation. The dentist may need only good lighting for visibility and gauze for
drying or debriding tissues. Sometimes a tongue depressor
and a soft-bristled toothbrush are useful. At other times, as
previously mentioned, the dentist will want the complete

Chapter 1

A

Examination of the Mouth and Other Relevant Structures

n

13

B

Figure 1-8 A, One method of positioning a child for an oral examination in a small, private consultation area. The dental assis-

tant is nearby to record findings. B, If space allows three people to sit in a row, this method may make it easier for the dental
assistant to hear the findings dictated by the dentist. The dental assistant also helps restrain the child’s legs.

DETECTION OF SUBSTANCE ABUSE

Figure 1-9 Oral examination of a very young child in the

dental operatory.

operatory available. The examination should begin with a
systematic and gentle digital exploration of the soft tissues
without any instruments. The child may find this gentle palpation soothing, especially when alveolar ridges in teething
areas are massaged. The digital examination may help relax
the child and encourage less resistance. If hand instruments
are needed, the dentist must be sure to have a stable finger
rest before inserting an instrument into the child’s mouth.
Although there is little effective communication between the dentist and patient, the child realizes at the conclusion of the examination that nothing “bad” happened
and that the procedure was permitted by the parents, who
were present and actually helped with the examination.
The child will not hold a lasting grudge against anyone,
and the experience will not have a detrimental effect on
the child’s future behavior as a dental patient. On the contrary, our experiences suggest that such early examinations
followed by regular recall examinations often contribute to
the youngsters’ becoming excellent dental patients without
fear at very young ages. These children’s chances for enjoying excellent oral health throughout life are thus enhanced.

It is within the scope of pediatric dentistry to be concerned with life-threatening habits and illnesses such as
alcoholism and drug addiction, which may occur in the
older child.
Rosenbaum9,10 has reported that abusers in the teen
years and younger are as common as adult addicts. Drug
abuse problems interact directly with the dental care of
a patient. Obtaining and maintaining a satisfactory history are important. The office health questionnaire, as
presented in this chapter, must be worded to allow the
patient or parent to give some indication of a drug problem. It is often difficult to detect addiction from casual
observation. Therefore input from the patient giving an
indication of addiction is needed. At subsequent visits the
dentist must also consider changes in the general health
history as well as answers to specific questions.
It is also important to know if the patient is taking
drugs at the time of the dental visit because there could be
an interaction with drugs, such as nitrous oxide, administered at the dental office. If the patient is under the influence of an abused substance, dental treatment should be
postponed until a time when the patient is not “high.”
Symptoms of substance abuse may include depression,
feelings of inadequacy, frustration, helplessness, immaturity, self-alienation, poor object relations, and major deficiencies in ego structure and functioning. Heavy drug users
tend to have poor impulse control and frequently neglect
hygiene in general and oral hygiene specifically. In addition, because a patient is taking drugs that affect normal
thought processes, the pain from untreated dental conditions may be masked. This combination of factors results
in a patient with very little dental interest who is practicing
unsatisfactory prevention, leading to increased oral disease.
Identification of substance abusers is difficult, even for
an experienced observer. There are specific clues, however. Abrupt changes in behavior are common, as are signs
of depression and moodiness. Interest in the opposite sex
often decreases. Without any apparent consumption of
alcohol, a drug-addicted person can appear intoxicated.

14

Chapter 1

n

Examination of the Mouth and Other Relevant Structures

There may be a desperate need for money, as well as loss
of weight and appetite. The presence of scars along veins
could indicate drug injection. Addicts frequently wear
long-sleeved shirts, regardless of the weather, in an effort
to cover identifying scars.
Fletcher and colleagues11 state that the use of illegal
drugs and volatile substances is common among young
people in developed countries, such as the United States
and the United Kingdom. In addition to presenting direct health risks, drug use is associated with accidental
injury; self-harm; suicide; and other “problem” behaviors,
such as alcohol misuse, unprotected sex, and antisocial
behavior. Drug use at an early age is also associated with
future use of particularly harmful drugs, such as heroin or
cocaine. In turn, dependence on these drugs is associated
with high rates of morbidity and mortality, social disadvantage, and crime. It is because of these health and social problems that reducing teenage drug use is a priority.
Their review of the literature, however, suggests that
positive ethos and overall levels of strong school relationships and engagement are associated with lower rates of
drug use; and that, at the individual level, negative behaviors and a
­ ttitudes relating to school are also associated
with drug use.
MacDonald12 reports that experimentation is a normal adolescent learning tool, but when combined with
normal adolescent curiosity and fearlessness, it may be
dangerous. Tobacco smoking is an example of a common
teenage experiment. In a study by the National Survey on
Drug Use and Health, 12% of adolescents of 12 to 17 years
of age had smoked one or more cigarettes in the preceding month; and of those who had never smoked, more
than 22% were considered susceptible to start smoking.13

ETIOLOGIC FACTORS IN SUBSTANCE ABUSE
Drug abuse in young people can be traced to many causes,
the most important of which is considered to be rebellion
against parents and society. Other factors may include a
need to forget the pressures of daily living, a desire for
pleasure, and a need to conform to a group with which
the young people want to be associated.14 Through drugs,
young people obtain a momentary feeling of independence and power because they have disobeyed the rules of
their parents and society. The satisfaction gained through
rebelling against parents can give adolescents a reinforcing motive for persisting in drug abuse.
Children of wealthy parents are increasingly recognized as a high-risk group for the development of such
traits as narcissism, poor impulse control, poor tolerance
of frustration, depression, and poor coping ability. Therefore it is not surprising that a large number of children
within this group use drugs to cope with frustrations,
boredom, anxiety, and depression.
In general, compared to youngsters who do not use drugs,
drug users have been found to be less interested in formal
education, less involved in organized activities such as athletics, and less likely to have well-defined goals. Adolescents
who use drugs heavily have been described as m
­ anifesting
more psychological problems than do nonusers. Significantly higher percentages of nonusers of drugs reported
close relationships with their parents. Children involved in

abusing drugs are more often found to have experienced the
loss of a parent or to have parents who are divorced.

SPECIFIC SUBSTANCES AND FREQUENCY OF USE
Since 1975, the University of Michigan’s Institute for Social
Research, funded by the National Institute of Drug Abuse,
has collected data on past month, past year, and lifetime
drug use among 12th graders. It was expanded in 1991
to include 8th and 10th graders. The most recent report
(http://www.monitoringthefuture.org//pubs/monographs/
mtf-overview2013.pdf) says that in the late 20th century,
young Americans reached extraordinarily high levels of illicit drug use. In 1975, the majority of young people (55%)
had used an illicit drug by the time they left high school.
This rose to 66% in 1981, but declined to 41% by 1992—the
low point. After 1992, in what the report calls the “relapse
phase” of the epidemic, the proportion rose considerably to
55% in 1999 and gradually declined to 47% in 2009 before
rising slightly to 50% by 2013.
Suppose the dentist identifies a person who needs
help. What can be done? Unless the dentist is exceptionally qualified to handle addiction problems, the answer
is direct or indirect referral to a treatment center. If the
person expresses a need, the dentist may directly inform
that person or the parents about area agencies that provide assistance. However, addicts may react defensively,
even with hostility, if a direct approach is used. As with
any problem related to general or dental health, preventive efforts must begin with the young. Children at a very
young age need to be helped to develop a positive selfimage, a sense of self-worth, and a separate identity.

SUICIDAL TENDENCIES IN CHILDREN
AND ADOLESCENTS
During the examination of the child, the pediatric dentist
should be alert to signs and symptoms of suicidal tendencies. How prevalent is suicide in the young child and adolescent? According to the American Academy of Child and
Adolescent Psychiatry (http://www.aacap.org), thousands
of teenagers commit suicide each year. It is the sixth leading cause of death in 5- to 14-year-olds and the third leading cause in 15- to 24-year-olds. Suicidal tendencies follow
a pattern and background that can be observed by the astute professional or parent. The following excerpt is from
the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry15:
Teenagers experience strong feelings of stress, confusion, self-doubt, pressure to succeed, financial
uncertainty, and other fears while growing up. For
some teenagers, divorce, the formation of a new
family with step-parents and step-siblings, or moving to a new community can be unsettling and can
intensify self-doubts. For some teens, suicide may
appear to be a solution to their problems and stress.
Depression and suicidal feelings are treatable mental
disorders. The child or adolescent needs to have his or
her illness recognized and diagnosed, and appropriate
treatment plans developed. When parents are in doubt
as to whether their child has a serious problem, a psychiatric examination can be helpful. Many of the signs

Chapter 1

and symptoms of suicidal feelings are similar to those of
depression.
Parents should be aware of the following signs from
adolescents who may attempt suicide:
• Changes in eating and sleeping habits
• Withdrawal from friends, family, and regular ­activities
• Violent actions, rebellious behavior, or running away
• Drug and alcohol use
• Unusual neglect of personal appearance
• Marked personality change
• Persistent boredom, difficulty concentrating, or a
decline in the quality of schoolwork
• Frequent complaints about physical symptoms, often
related to emotions, such as stomachaches, headaches, or fatigue
• Loss of interest in pleasurable activities
• Not tolerating praise or rewards
A teenager who is planning to commit suicide may
also exhibit the following signs:
• Complain of being a bad person or “feeling rotten”
inside
• Give verbal hints with statements such as, “I won’t be
a problem for you much longer,” “Nothing matters,”
“It’s no use,” and “I won’t see you again.”
• Put his or her affairs in order; for example, give away
favorite possessions, clean his or her room, or throw
away important belongings
• Become suddenly cheerful after a period of depression
• Have signs of psychosis (hallucinations or bizarre
thoughts)
Children who say they want to kill themselves should
not be ignored, and further expressions of concern and
discussion with the child are important. In addition, assistance from a mental health professional should be actively sought. With appropriate counseling and family
support, intervention can be successful.
It should be recognized that the pediatric dentist and
the orthodontist are in a unique position to recognize
early warning signs of adolescent suicide. Loochtan and
Cole16 surveyed 1000 practicing orthodontists and 54 department chairs of postdoctoral programs. Of those surveyed, 50% had at least one patient who had attempted
suicide, and 25% had at least one young patient who actually did commit suicide.

INFECTION CONTROL IN THE DENTAL
OFFICE
The dental team is exposed to a wide variety of microorganisms in the saliva and blood of their patients. These may
include hepatitis B and C, herpes viruses, cytomegalovirus,
measles virus, mumps virus, chickenpox virus, human immunodeficiency virus, Mycobacterium tuberculosis, streptococci, staphylococci, and other non–vaccine-preventable
infections. Because it is impossible to identify all of those
patients who may harbor dangerous microorganisms,
it is necessary to use standard precautions and p
­ ractice
infection control procedures routinely to avoid spread of
disease. The following infection control procedures as described by Miller and Palenik17 are based on those recommended for dentistry by the Centers for Disease Control

n

Examination of the Mouth and Other Relevant Structures

15

and Prevention (CDC) in the Public Health Service of the
U.S. Department of Health and Human S­ ervices18:
• Always obtain (and update) a thorough medical history (as discussed previously in this chapter) and include questions about medications, current illnesses,
hepatitis, unintentional weight loss, lymphadenopathy, oral soft tissue lesions, or other infections.
• Clean all reusable instruments in an ultrasonic cleaner or washer/disinfector, and minimize the amount of
hand scrubbing. Wear heavy rubber gloves, mask, and
protective clothing and eyewear to protect against
puncture injuries and splashing.
• Sterilize all reusable instruments that penetrate or
come into contact with oral tissues or that become
contaminated with saliva or blood. Metal or heatstable instruments should be sterilized in a steam
autoclave, a dry heat oven, or an unsaturated chemical
vapor sterilizer. Heat-sensitive items may require up
to 10 hours’ exposure time for sterilization in a liquid
chemical agent approved by the U.S. Food and Drug
Administration as a disinfectant/sterilant, followed by
rinsing with sterile water. High-level disinfection may
be accomplished by submersion in the disinfectant/
sterilant chemical for the exposure time recommended
on the product label, followed by rinsing with water.
• Monitoring of sterilization procedures should include a
combination of process parameters, including mechanical, chemical, and biological. These parameters evaluate both the sterilizing conditions and the procedure’s
effectiveness. Biological monitoring must occur weekly.
• Dental instruments must be wrapped before sterilization. Unwrapped instruments have no shelf life and
must be used immediately after being processed.
• Personal protective equipment (gloves, masks, protective eyewear, and clinical attire) should be worn when
treating patients.
• Contamination of clinical contact surfaces with
patient materials can occur by direct spray or spatter
generated either during dental procedures or by contact with gloved hands. Barrier protection of surfaces
and equipment can prevent contamination of clinical
contact surfaces, but is particularly effective for those
that are difficult to clean. Barriers include clear plastic
wrap, bags, sheets, tubing, and plastic-backed paper
or other materials impervious to moisture. If barriers
are not used, cleaning and disinfection of surfaces
between patients should involve use of an EPA-registered hospital disinfectant with a tuberculocidal claim
(i.e., intermediate-level disinfectant).
• Hand hygiene (e.g., handwashing, hand antisepsis,
or surgical hand antisepsis) substantially reduces
potential pathogens on the hands. Evidence indicates
that proper hand hygiene is the single most critical
measure for reducing the risk of the transmission of
organisms. For routine dental examinations and nonsurgical procedures, handwashing and hand antisepsis
is achieved by using plain or antimicrobial soap and
water. If the hands are not visibly soiled, an alcoholbased hand rub is adequate.
• Regulated medical waste is only a limited subset of
waste, constituting 9% to 15% of total waste in hospitals

16

Chapter 1

n

Examination of the Mouth and Other Relevant Structures

and 1% to 2% of total waste in dental offices. Regulated
medical waste requires special storage, handling, neutralization, and disposal and is covered by federal, state,
and local rules and regulations. Examples of regulated
waste found in dental practice settings are solid waste
soaked or saturated with blood or saliva (e.g., gauze
saturated with blood after surgery), extracted teeth, surgically removed hard and soft tissues, and contaminated
sharp items (e.g., needles, scalpel blades, and wires).
• Dental prostheses, appliances, and items used in
their fabrication (e.g., impressions, occlusal rims, and
bite registrations) are potential sources for crosscontamination and require handling in a manner that
prevents exposure of both practitioners and patients.

BIOFILM
The goal of infection control in dentistry is to reduce or
eliminate exposure of patients and dental team members
to microorganisms. Potential pathogens can usually come
from patients and practitioners. Another source, however,
could be from the environment, such as via air or water.
Dental unit water lines contain relatively small
amounts of water, much of which is in continuous contact with the inner surfaces of the tubing. The water is
not in constant motion with extended dormant periods.
Movement of water varies, with greatest flow being in the
middle of the tubing. Dental unit water lines readily become colonized by a variety of microorganisms, including bacteria, viruses, and protozoa. Water entering dental
units usually contains few microorganisms. However, water coming out of the unit is often highly contaminated.
Proliferation of microorganisms occurs within biofilms
that adhere to internal surfaces of dental unit water lines.
Current guidelines19 for the proper treatment of dental
unit water lines include the following:
1.	Dental line water should contain <200 colony-forming
units per mL (CFU/mL).
2.	For surgical procedures, use sterile or saline water
from a single-use source.
3.	Start each day by purging all lines by flushing thoroughly with water.
4.	Purge all air and water from high-speed handpieces
for 20 to 30 seconds after each patient.
5.	Consider separate reservoirs, chemical treatment protocols, and sterile water delivery systems.
6.	Use antiretraction valves and terminal flush devices
into the dental unit.
7.	Drain the water lines at the end of the day.
8.	Disinfect dental units attached to hospital main water
supplies every 4 months with 500 ppm chlorinated
water.

EMERGENCY DENTAL TREATMENT
A patient’s initial dental appointment is often prompted by an emergency situation. The diagnostic procedures necessary for an emergency dental appointment
were outlined in this chapter previously, but the emergency appointment tends to focus on and resolve a single problem or a single set of related problems rather
than provide a comprehensive oral diagnosis and management plan. Once the emergency problem is under

c­ ontrol, the dentist should offer comprehensive services
to the p
­ atient or parents.
The remainder of this book presents information for
dentists and dental students to augment their diagnostic
and management skills in providing oral health care services to children and adolescents during both emergency
and preplanned dental visits.

REFERENCES
1.	
American Academy of Pediatric Dentistry: Guideline on
­periodicity of examination, preventive dental services, anticipatory guidance/counseling, and oral treatment for infants,
children, and adolescents, Pediatr Dent 35:114–121, 2013.
[Suppl: Reference manual 2013-2022].
2.	Glick M, Greenberg MS, Ship JA: Introduction to oral medicine and oral diagnosis: evaluation of the dental patient. In
Greenberg MS, Glick M, Ship JA, editors: Burket’s oral medicine, ed 11, Hamilton, Ontario, 2008, BC Decker.
3.	Fuhrer CT, Weddell JA, Sanders BJ, Jones JE, Dean JA, Tomlin A: Effect on behavior of dental treatment rendered ­under
conscious sedation and general anesthesia in pediatric
­patients, Pediatr Dent 31(7):492–497, 2009.
4.	Okeson JP: Temporomandibular disorders in children, P
­ ediatr
Dent 11(12):325–333, 1989.
5.	
American Academy of Pediatric Dentistry: Guideline on
­acquired temporomandibular disorders in infants, children,
and adolescents, Pediatr Dent 35:262–267, 2013. [Suppl: Reference manual 2013-2014].
6.	Okeson JP: Management of temporomandibular disorders and
­occlusion, ed 7, St. Louis, 2012, Mosby.
7.	Clerehugh V, Tugnait A: Diagnosis and management of periodontal diseases in children and adolescents, Periodontology
26:146–168, 2000-2001.
8.	Blayney JR, Hill IN: Fluorine and dental caries, J Am Dent
­Assoc 74:233–302, 1967.
9.	Rosenbaum CH: Dental precautions in treating drug addicts:
a hidden problem among teens and preteens, Pediatr Dent
2:94–96, 1980.
10.	Rosenbaum CH: Did you treat a drug addict today? Int Dent J
31:307–312, 1981.
11.	Fletcher A, Bonell C, Hargreaves J: School effects on young
people’s drug use: a systematic review of interventional and
observational studies, J Adolesc Health 42(3):209–220, 2008.
12.	MacDonald DI: Drugs, drinking, and adolescence, Am J Dis
Child 138:117–125, 1984.
13.	Centers for Disease Control and Prevention: Racial/ethnic
differences among youths in cigarette smoking and susceptibility to start smoking—United States, 2002-2004, MMWR
Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 55:1275–1277, 2006.
14.	http://www.ijpm.info/article.asp?issn=0253-7176;year=2014;
volume=36;issue=1;spage=58;epage=61;aulast=Gopiram.
15.	
American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry:
http://www.aacap.org/AACAP/Families_and_Youth/Facts_
for_Families/Facts_for_Families_Pages/Teen_Suicide_10
.aspx, accessed March 2014.
16. Loochtan RM, Cole RM: Adolescent suicide in orthodontics: results of a survey, Am J Orthod Dentofacial Orthop 1010:
180–187, 1991.
17.	Miller CH, Palenik CJ: Infection control and hazardous materials
management for the dental team, 5th ed. St. Louis, 2013, Mosby.
18.	
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention: guidelines
for infection control in dental health care settings—2003,
MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 52(RR17):1–78, 2003.
19.	Garg SK, Mittal S, Kaur P: Dental unit waterline management: historical perspectives and current trends, J Investig
Clin Dent 3(4):247–252, 2012.

CHAPTER

2

Radiographic Techniques
s Edwin T. Parks and Johan K. Aps

For additional resources, please visit the

website.

CHAPTER OUTLINE
RADIATION SAFETY AND
PROTECTION
The Basics of Radiation Protection
Protection of the Dental Staff
Protection of the Patient
RADIOGRAPHIC IMAGE RECEPTORS
Analog Film
Photo-Stimulable Phosphor Storage
Plates

Solid-State Sensors
Image-Viewing Conditions
RADIOGRAPHIC TECHNIQUES
Intraoral Radiography
Extraoral Radiography
SELECTION CRITERIA AND
RADIOGRAPHIC EXAMINATIONS
Criteria for Exposing Children
to Ionizing Radiation

W

ilhelm Conrad Roentgen’s discovery of x-rays
on November 8, 1895, initiated the first dental radiographs ever taken, by Otto Walkhoff in
January 1896. A new era was born, and ever since, dental
radiographs have proven their significant value in dental
and maxillofacial diagnosis. For many years, two-dimensional intraoral radiography and extraoral radiography
were the only radiographic options; but a little more than
two decades ago, three-dimensional imaging in dentistry
(cone beam computed tomography, CBCT) became much
more readily available. In addition, other advanced imaging modalities, such as multi-slice computed tomography (MSCT), magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), and
ultrasound imaging, are also available.
This chapter provides a general overview of the techniques currently used in pediatric dental and maxillofacial
radiology and will provide a clear overview of the image
receptors, specialized techniques, and the indications and
justifications for exposing pediatric patients to ionizing
radiation or other imaging modalities.

RADIATION SAFETY AND PROTECTION
THE BASICS OF RADIATION PROTECTION
The three basic principles of radiation protection are as
follows:

The Justification Principle
This principle states that one should expose patients to
ionizing radiation only if there is no other way to obtain the diagnostic information or if this exposure will
positively influence the diagnosis, the treatment, and the
patient’s health. The principle requires that one should
attempt to obtain previously taken images because these

Radiographic Exposures in Cases
of Dento-Alveolar Trauma
Radiographic Exposures in SpecialNeeds Patients
INTERPRETATION OF RADIOGRAPHS

contain important information and may negate the need
for new radiographs. Special needs patients and children
may not always cope well with radiographic procedures.
If the cooperation of the patient is unlikely to result in a
good-quality image, one should refrain from exposing the
patient to ionizing radiation.

The Limitation Principle
This principle states that one should always try to keep the
radiation dose as low as reasonably achievable (ALARA).
Current selection criteria will assist the clinician in addressing the principle of dose limitation.

The Optimization Principle
Optimization means that one should obtain the best
quality images possible, with both previous principles in
mind. This can, however, imply the use of a technique
that exposes the patient to a higher radiation dose, which
can be justified only if the technique offers the greatest
benefit for the patient and his/her health outcome.
The purpose for adhering to the above three principles
is that x-rays can impart energy to the matter they traverse;
if that matter is living tissue, then some biological injury
may occur. Although much information is available regarding high levels of radiation (e.g., from cancer radiation
treatments and nuclear accidents) and subsequent damage,
little is known about the effects of low-energy ionizing
radiation (as used in diagnostic radiology and dentistry
in particular) on biological systems. Our assumptions of
damage are based on extrapolation of data from high to
lower levels of radiation. Therefore, two models have
been devised to explain these effects: the non-threshold
(stochastic) and threshold models. The non-threshold
model suggests that any dose of x-rays can cause
biological damage, whereas the threshold model suggests
17

18

Chapter 2

n

Radiographic Techniques

that no detrimental effects of ionizing radiation occur
below a particular level or “threshold” of x-ray exposure.
In 2012, White and Mallaya reported that until low-energy
ionizing radiation is proven to be risk-free, dental health
professionals should protect patients accordingly.
Dental health professionals must be concerned about
any risk that the patient may encounter during therapy,
with focus on three primary biological effects of low-level
radiation: (1) carcinogenesis, (2) teratogenesis (malformations), and (3) mutagenesis. Carcinogenesis and malformations are responses of somatic tissues and, in most
instances, are believed to have a threshold response (deterministic effect); that is, a certain amount of radiation
is necessary before the response can be seen. Mutations
may occur as a response of genetic tissue (gonads) to ioni­
zing radiation and are believed to have no threshold (stochastic effects). In general, younger tissues and organs are
more sensitive to ionizing radiation, with the sensitivity
decreasing from the period before birth until maturity.
Furthermore, far higher doses of radiation can be withstood by localized areas than by the whole body. The annual background radiation for individuals living in the
United States is about 3600 microSieverts. It is estimated
that, on average, about 20% of that amount results from
medical and dental diagnostic imaging. Later in this chapter, radiation doses will be discussed from the perspective
of this annual background radiation. This information is
important when discussing the potential impact of diagnostic x-ray imaging exposure with patients and parents.
To facilitate the calculation of effective radiation doses
from certain diagnostic exposures, the International Commission on Radiological Protection (ICRP) has provided
tissue-weighting factors for human tissues (Table 2-1).

Table 2-1
The Tissue-Weighting Factors (WT) as
Suggested by the International Commission
(Higher WT Equals More Radiation Sensitivity)
on Radiological Protection (ICRP, 2005)
Tissue

Bone marrow
Breast
Colon
Lung
Stomach
Bladder
Esophagus
Gonads
Liver
Thyroid
Bone surface
Brain
Kidneys
Salivary glands
Skin
Remaining tissues

WT (2005)

0.12
0.12
0.12
0.12
0.12
0.05
0.05
0.05
0.05
0.05
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.10

Some tissues are more vulnerable and susceptible to the
effects of ionizing radiation. Table 2-2 shows the estimated
risks for the development of a fatal cancer from exposure
to diagnostic radiation. It is clear that the use of certain
imaging modalities must be well justified. Table 2-3 shows
the multiplication factors per age category, highlighting
children’s increased sensitivity to x-rays.

PROTECTION OF THE DENTAL STAFF
The best method for protecting dental staff from ionizing
radiation is the use of shielding. Solid walls (preferably
with a lead glass window) are the best protection one can
achieve. However, some offices lack such walls, and the

Table 2-2
Estimated Fatal Cancer Risks from Several
Radiographic Examinations (Data from
Ludlow et al., 2008, JADA)
Estimated Risk
of a Fatal Cancer
(adult)

X-Ray Diagnostic Investigation

Full-mouth x-rays with phosphor
storage plates or F-speed analog film
and rectangular collimation
Full-mouth x-rays with phosphor
storage plates or F-speed analog film
and circular collimation
Full-mouth x-rays with D-speed
analog film and circular collimation
Two bitewing radiographs with
phosphor storage plates or F-speed
analog film and rectangular
collimation
Dental panoramic radiograph
(solid-state sensor)
Skull frontal radiograph (phosphor
storage plate)
Lateral skull radiograph (phosphor
storage plate)

2 in 1 million

9 in 1 million

21 in 1 million
0.3 in 1 million

0.8 to 1.3 in 1
million
0.3 in 1 million
0.3 in 1 million

Table 2-3
Multiplication Factors Per Age Category for
the Estimated Risks of Developing a Fatal
Cancer as a Result of Diagnostic Radiographs*
Age Category

Multiplication Factor

<10 years
10-20 years
20-30 years
30-50 years
50-80 years
>80 years

×3
×2
× 1.5
× 0.5
× 0.3
×0

*Whaites E: Essentials of dental radiography and radiology, Edinburgh, Churchill Livingstone, 2007.

Chapter 2

radiographer must maintain a safe distance from the x-ray
source (Fig. 2-1). Once the x-ray machine is engaged, the
patient is to be considered the source of radiation. The
radiographer should stand either at 90° to or behind the
radiation source; at least 6 feet (2 m) from the radiation
source is safe. One should never stand in the path of the
primary radiation beam or hold the image receptor or the
wall-mounted x-ray machine. If, for whatever reason, insufficient distance is maintained, one should wear a lead
apron with thyroid shielding and stand in the appropriate
position relative to the radiation source. The 6-foot rule
also applies to panoramic and cephalometric imaging.
For CBCT imaging, one should always stand behind a
radioprotective barrier.

PROTECTION OF THE PATIENT
In addition to the three basic principles of radiation protection (justification, limitation, and optimization), one
6 feet or
2 meters

6 feet or
2 meters

6 feet or
2 meters

Figure 2-1 Safe locations for the radiographer when obtaining an intraoral radiograph. Bird’s eye view of a patient being exposed for a bitewing radiograph. The arrows indicate
the safest place for the radiographer to stand: at least 6 feet
or 2 meters from the patient.

A

n

Radiographic Techniques

19

can apply the following additional techniques to reduce
the radiation burden to the patient:
• Collimation of the x-ray beam
• Correct focus-to-skin distance
• Lead apron with thyroid collar
• More radiation-sensitive image receptors
The use of rectangular collimation limits the surface being irradiated to the size of the image receptor, reducing the
radiation dose by about 50%, compared with that achieved
with a 2.75-inch-diameter (6 cm) circular collimator (Fig.
2-2). Rectangular collimators are available from different
vendors. They are either attached to the tube head or are
included in the image receptor holding device. Rectangular
collimation also decreases the amount of scatter in the patient’s tissues, which in turn results in better image quality.
The focus-to-skin distance is the distance between the xray machine’s anode (where x-rays are created) and the skin
of the patient’s cheek or lip. Ideally this should be a minimum of 8 inches (20 cm) to reduce the amount of low-­energy
x-radiation reaching the patient. Many m
­ anufacturers recess
the x-ray tube to increase the focus-to-skin distance without
increasing the overall length of the tube head.
The utility of a lead apron (as opposed to a thyroid collar)
(Fig. 2-3) has been extensively discussed. ICRP guidelines
suggest that the use of a lead apron is not necessary with
rectangular collimation, short exposure times, adequate
x-ray energies, and fast image receptors. Several studies
have shown that, with rectangular collimation, the patient
is afforded protection from scatter radiation similar to
that achieved with a lead apron.
Fast image receptors, which require less exposure time,
are advised, since their use will enable the lowest possible radiation dose to be absorbed by the patient. If direct
exposure film is used, either E- or F-speed film is recommended. D-speed film requires at least twice the exposure
of E-speed film and approximately 70% more exposure
than F-speed film. Digital image receptors, either photostimulable phosphor plates (PSPPs) or solid-state sensors,
require much less exposure than D-speed film. Thus, digital image receptors and E- or F-speed film are considered
to achieve similar lower radiation doses for patients.

B

Figure 2-2 Examples of rectangular collimators. The rectangular end of the beam-indicating device decreases the exposed sur-

face by more than 50%, compared with a 2.75-inch-diameter round collimation. The image on the left shows a non-removable rectangular collimator mounted on an intraoral x-ray machine. The image on the right shows a removable rectangular
collimator (DENTSPLY® Universal Collimator) mounted on the circular open-ended beam-indicating device.

20

Chapter 2

n

Radiographic Techniques

Table 2-4
ISO Formats (International Organization for
Standardization) of Intraoral Analog Film and
Phosphor Storage Plates and their Dimensions
ISO Format

Dimensions (mm)

0
1
2
3
4

22 × 35
24 × 40
21 × 41
27 × 54
57 × 76

Figure 2-3 An apron containing lead or a material equivalent to lead for dental use.

When a lead apron is used with patients undergoing
panoramic imaging, the apron must be placed high in
the front, low in the back of the neck, and low over the
shoulders. With correct positioning, the apron will not be
captured in the panoramic images.
Correct positioning of the patient, image receptor, and
tube head as well as appropriate exposure factors will decrease the need for retakes and will help keep the patient’s
dose as low as reasonably achievable. Darkroom quality
assurance is essential if the radiographic imaging is filmbased. Adequacy of safe lights, processing chemistry, and
equipment maintenance and cleaning should be continuously monitored to maintain the quality and longevity of
the film-based image.
From the above, it is clear that there are several actions
one can take to minimize absorbed radiation doses and
optimize image quality.

RADIOGRAPHIC IMAGE RECEPTORS
ANALOG FILM
Analog film is still used by almost 50% of clinicians in
the United States. Some dental professionals have not yet
switched to digital radiography or have made only a partial switch (e.g., film for intraoral radiographs and digital
for panoramic).

Direct Film
Direct analog film is the film of choice for intraoral radiography. It is called direct because of its high sensitivity
to x-rays. Only E- or F-speed film should be used because
these require shorter radiation exposure times and hence
contribute to a lower radiation burden for the patient. The
exposure times needed for E- and F-films are comparable
with those for digital image receptors. Direct analog film
comes in different sizes (Table 2-4), making it suitable for
different patients and tasks. The smallest size is 22 × 35 mm

Figure 2-4 An opened panoramic cassette (15 × 30 mm)

with intensifying screens on both sides (white surfaces) and
analog film (blue-purple). A similar cassette, but without
intensifying screens, is used for phosphor storage plates.
(ISO format 0), which can be used for bitewing radiographs in the primary dentition and for periapical images
of individual maxillary or mandibular incisors. Such film
is often called “pedo-size” or “child-size.” The ISO format
1 size is 24 × 40 mm and can be used for the same purposes as described for size 0. The ISO format 2 size is 31
× 41 mm and is probably the most common size used. It
can be used for bitewing images, periapical images in children in a transitional dentition, in adolescents and adults,
as well as for occlusal radiographs in the primary dentition. The ISO format 3 size is 27 × 54 mm, which is used
only for bitewing images in the transitional or permanent
dentition. The largest size is 57 × 76 mm (ISO format 4),
typically used for occlusal radiographs of the mandible
or maxilla in the mixed and permanent dentition. Film
packages contain either single or double film. Since analog film is single-use, packages can be bent if necessary, although this should be minimized to reduce the likelihood
of image distortion. Disadvantages of analog film include
double exposures and need for sufficient office space to
store chemicals, processor, and radiographs.

Indirect Film
Indirect analog film is more sensitive to light than it is to xrays and should be used only in a cassette with an intensifying screen (Fig. 2-4). Indirect film is usually 15 × 30 cm or

Chapter 2

A

n

Radiographic Techniques

21

B

Figure 2-5 The physical appearance of a phosphor storage plate (left) looks very similar to that of analog film (right). The ISO

format 2 is shown here.

18 × 24 cm, depending on its application. The intensifying
screen converts the x-ray energy into light, which reaches
the film and forms the latent image. In dentistry, this type
of film is used in panoramic imaging and cephalometric
radiography. The use of intensifying screens in cassettes
keeps the exposure time as short as possible, but the images
are less sharp than those obtained with direct analog film.
The cassette should be checked regularly for light-tightness
to ensure that no light can cause fogging of the film. The
intensifying screens should be kept clean since dust or
other particles can cause radiopaque artifacts in the image.
One should use only the manufacturer’s recommended
cleansing agent to clean the intensifying screens.

PHOTO-STIMULABLE PHOSPHOR STORAGE
PLATES
PSPPs (Fig. 2-5) appear very similar to analog film and also
come in different sizes. This technique is also referred to as
indirect digital imaging because the image is captured in
an analog format and converted to a digital image when
scanned and is not displayed immediately when the radiographic image is captured. The phosphor layer is comprised of europium-activated barium fluorohalide which,
when exposed to x-rays, will capture a latent image. The
phosphor plate emits a blue fluorescent light when exposed to a red helium laser light inside the PSPP scanner.
The blue emissions captured by a photomultiplier are subsequently converted into a visible image. Once the image
is generated, the scanner will expose PSPPs to white light
to erase the latent image. Because PSPPs are sensitive to
white light, the scanner cannot be placed in a brightly lit
area, since this will degrade the image once the phosphor
plates are freed from the light-tight barrier. PSPPs come
in different sizes and can be used for either intraoral or
extraoral applications. When used for intraoral radiography, they should be wrapped in a single-use plastic lighttight barrier to avoid both cross-contamination and the
toxicity of the phosphor layer. When PSPP is used in a
cassette for extraoral radiography, there is no need for it
to be wrapped in a plastic barrier. The cassette, however,

should be light-tight and should not contain intensifying
screens, as is the case with analog indirect film. Because
of the various sizes and flexibility of PSPPs, it is acceptable for intraoral radiography in pediatric patients and
patients with special needs. The biggest disadvantage of
PSPPs is their susceptibility to scratches, bite marks, and
creasing, which could damage the phosphor layer (Fig.
2-6). This damage is irreversible and will always be visible
as a radiopacity in the image. Just as with analog film,
double exposures are possible with this technology.

SOLID-STATE SENSORS
Solid-state sensors (Fig. 2-7) are also known as direct digital
receptors because they display the radiographic image instantaneously following exposure. There are two different
types of solid-state sensors: charged coupled devices (CCD)
and complementary metal oxide semiconductors (CMOS).
These sensors differ in how the image is captured but appear similar in both external appearance and image output. Both CCD and CMOS sensors use a scintillation screen
(usually gadolinium oxysulfide or cesium iodide) to transform the x-ray energy into visible green light, which is then
converted into a visible image. Direct digital sensors are
available in sizes 0, 1, and 2. The primary disadvantage of
these sensors is that they are relatively bulky and not always
easy to position in the patient’s mouth (Video 2-1: Sensor
placement: use of direct digital radiology technique in the
operating room). The majority of direct digital sensors are
attached to a computer by a shielded wire cable, which can
be damaged by repeated biting. The solid-state sensors are
also incorporated into extraoral radiography devices, such
as panoramic machines and cephalometric units. The sensors are arranged in a vertical array and capture the x-rays
while the panoramic or cephalometric machine scans. The
image is formed by vertical lines or columns of pixels. Some
manufacturers use a lens in front of the solid-state sensor so
that the image from a cephalometric unit can be obtained
in one exposure, instead of via a scanning motion from anterior to posterior. This saves time and radiation dose and
helps reduce motion artifacts.

22

Chapter 2

n

Radiographic Techniques

B

A

D

C
Figure 2-6 A, Phosphor plate that has been bent. B, Phosphor plate that has been bitten. C, Phosphor plate with curling of the
phosphor layer on the edge of the short side of the plate. D, Phosphor plate image taken with a phosphor plate ISO format 0,
with several bitemarks and scratches. The latter will appear on every image that will be taken with this phosphor storage plate.

IMAGE-VIEWING CONDITIONS

Figure 2-7 Solid-state sensors, sizes 0, 1, and 2. (Courtesy

SIRONA DENTAL SYSTEMS, INC.)

Analog film should be viewed on a clean and bright view
box, with a clean viewing surface and a properly functioning light source. Optimal viewing conditions should
allow one to collimate the light, so the light area is restricted to the size of the film. The viewer’s eyes should
be blocked to surrounding light to ameliorate perception
of details. Also, the ambient light in the room should be
dimmed so that more details in the radiographic image
can be seen. This is not always feasible in a dental office
setting, but efforts should be made to place the view box
in a dimmed area of the office.
Digital images are viewed on a computer monitor or
screen. Ideally, ambient light should be subdued and
the monitor calibrated. Some viewing software programs allow for calibration of the computer screen. If
they do not, a “monitor calibration screen” can easily be
downloaded from the Internet (Fig. 2-8). Monitor performance should be evaluated periodically. The monitor

Chapter 2

n

Radiographic Techniques

23

patients. The patient’s size and ability to cooperate
must be considered when a radiographic technique is
selected.

INTRAORAL RADIOGRAPHY
Intraoral tube heads should generate between 60 and
70 kVp to produce adequate diagnostic images. The timer
must be accurate to allow for short exposure times. Radiation-sensitive (rapid) image receptors should be used at
all times.
Collimation of the radiation beam is advised to reduce
the irradiated surface area to the size of the image receptor. There are several types of intraoral radiographs, each
of which has specific indications and limitations.

Periapical Radiography

Figure 2-8 Example of monitor calibration screens.

should be positioned in an area of subdued lighting away
from a window or bright light. Touch-screen monitors
should not be used since fingerprints can cause image
quality to deteriorate. From the literature, it is clear that
most computer monitors provide sufficient resolution
and contrast for the vast majority of dental diagnostic
needs.
A wide range of image receptors can be used in pediatric and special-needs dentistry. It is up to the dental
professional to choose the system that works best in his
or her practice since technology changes rapidly and
image receptors will also change. Perhaps in the near
future, technology will be available that makes image
capture easier for both the clinician and the patient.
Digital image receptors offer the opportunity for the
captured image to be enhanced. Common enhancements include density and contrast, magnification, and
edge-sharpening. Figure 2-9 demonstrates the effects of
density and contrast enhancements.

RADIOGRAPHIC TECHNIQUES
Multiple radiographic techniques must be used to manage
the wide range of pediatric and special-needs dental

Periapical radiographs should show the crown of the
tooth and at least 3 mm beyond the apex of the tooth. To
achieve this coverage, one can use either the paralleling
technique or the bisecting angle technique. The paralleling technique is preferred because of its accuracy.
Paralleling Technique. This is the most accurate
technique for taking intraoral radiographs. The image
receptor should be positioned parallel to the long axis
of the teeth, while the x-ray beam is directed perpendicular to the image receptor. Ideally, image receptor holders that enable one to aim easily and correctly should
be used (Fig. 2-10). This means that the aiming device
must firmly grip the image receptor and that there is an
extraoral component that allows the x-ray beam to be
positioned correctly in both the vertical and horizontal
planes. Other holders, such as those displayed in Figure
2-11, do not provide this extraoral component, and can
produce either elongation or foreshortening of the image if the vertical angulation is incorrect or overlapping
of proximal surfaces if the horizontal angulation is incorrect. Both angulation errors can result in the need
for a retake.
Bisecting Angle Technique. In the bisecting angle
technique, the image receptor is placed as close to the
teeth as possible, and the central x-ray is directed perpendicular to a line that bisects the angle created by the
tooth and image receptor (Fig. 2-12). This technique is
obviously more prone to geometric errors and should
not be regarded as the preferred technique. Elongation
or foreshortening (vertical angulation errors) of the
image or interproximal overlap (horizontal angulation
errors) of the image is often the result of inaccurate
aiming.

Bitewing Radiography
Bitewing radiographs are intended to assess interproximal caries and interproximal bone height. Bitewing
geometry is based on the paralleling technique, where
the image receptor is placed parallel to the teeth and
the x-ray beam is aimed perpendicular to the receptor.
Overlap of proximal surfaces is minimal with the proper image receptor holders, which assist in directing the
x-ray beam through the proximal contacts. However, it
is the clinician’s evaluation of the receptor placement
that determines the accuracy of the image, rather than

24

Chapter 2

n

Radiographic Techniques

I

II

III

IV

V

Figure 2-9 This figure shows how adjustments in contrast and density can alter the information in the image one sees on the

screen. The image at the top is the original image displayed by the software. The images in the first line have increasing contrast, and those in the second line have decreasing contrast. The images in the third line have decreasing density, and those in
the fourth line have increasing density. The bottom line is a combination of changed contrast and density.

Chapter 2

A

n

Radiographic Techniques

25

B

C

D

Figure 2-10 Illustration of the Rinn® paralleling technique beam-aiming and image receptor holding device. The bite block
holds the image receptor firmly and allows for ideal positioning in the patient’s mouth. It also allows for the attachment of a
metal rod that aids in correct horizontal and vertical aiming of the x-ray beam. The plastic ring (yellow) demonstrates rectangular cut-outs that allow the rectangular collimator/beam-aiming device to be aimed perpendicular to the image receptor.
The two images at the bottom are other examples of acceptable image receptor holders/aiming devices.

EZ-Prop

Adhesive
Bite-Wing Tabs
Disposable XCP®
Bite-Block

A

Stable®
Bite-Block

Bite-Wing Loops

B

Figure 2-11 Image receptor holders without extraoral aids. It is obvious that these are not ideal for aiming perfectly perpen-

dicular to the image receptor.

26

Chapter 2

n

Radiographic Techniques

A

C

B

D

Figure 2-12 The bisecting angle technique illustrated for maxillary and mandibular incisors and for mandibular and maxillary

molars. The x-ray beam (black arrows) must be aimed perpendicular to the imaginary bisecting angle (interrupted yellow line)
between the long axis of the tooth (red line) and the long axis of the image receptor (blue line).
the receptor holder (Fig. 2-13). Paper tabs, styrofoam
tabs, or a device like the Ezee Grip to hold the image
receptor in the mouth does not offer extraoral guidance
to aim the central x-ray through the proximal contacts.
Anterior Maxillary Occlusal Technique. In the
anterior maxillary occlusal technique, the patient’s
occlusal plane should be parallel to the floor, and the
sagittal plane should be perpendicular to the floor (Fig.
2-14). A size 2 image receptor is placed in the patient’s
mouth so that the long axis of the film runs from left to
right, rather than anteroposteriorly, and the midsagittal plane bisects the film. The patient is instructed to
bite lightly to hold the receptor; a tongue blade can
be attached to PSPP or film receptors (Fig. 2-15), and
rigid receptors should be wrapped in gauze to protect

the sensor when the patient bites on it. The anterior
edge of the receptor should extend approximately 2
mm in front of the incisal edge of the central incisors.
The central x-ray is directed to the apices of the central
incisors and a centimeter (half-inch) above the tip of
the nose and through the midline. The vertical angle
is +60°. This receptor is exposed at the usual setting for
maxillary incisor periapical films.
Posterior Maxillary Occlusal Technique. In the
posterior maxillary occlusal technique, the patient’s
occlusal plane should be parallel to the floor, and the
sagittal plane should be perpendicular to the floor. A
size 2 image receptor is placed in the patient’s mouth
so that the long axis of the film is parallel to the floor.
The anterior edge of the receptor should extend just

Chapter 2

A

n

Radiographic Techniques

27

B
R

L

C
Figure 2-13 Bitewing holders with extraoral aids that allow for proper perpendicular aiming at the image receptor and the

teeth. The bottom image represents a schematic view of how a bitewing image should be taken and how the image receptor
holder aiming device (e.g., Rinn®) should be used.
mesial to the canine. The outer buccal edge of the receptor should extend approximately 2 mm beyond the
primary molar crowns. The patient is instructed to bite
lightly to hold the receptor. The central x-ray is directed toward the apices of the primary molars as well as
interproximally. The vertical angle is +50°. The receptor
is exposed at the usual setting for maxillary premolar
periapical projection.
Anterior Mandibular Occlusal Technique. The
film placement for the anterior mandibular occlusal
technique is identical to that for the anterior maxillary
occlusal technique, except that the receptor must be
­
placed so that the tube side faces the x-ray source (Fig.
2-16). In addition, when the patient bites on the receptor, the anterior edge of the receptor is 2 mm beyond the
incisal edge of the lower incisors. The patient’s head is
positioned so that the occlusal plane is at a 45° angle. The
cone is then aligned at a −15° vertical angle, and the central x-ray is directed through the symphysis.

Oblique Occlusal Radiography
Oblique occlusal radiography is also based on the bisecting angle technique; it is a good alternative for p
­ atients
with a severe gag reflex or who cannot tolerate the
positioning of the image receptor holder device. It is
­advisable to tape two wooden tongue depressors around
the ­image receptor to position it in the patient’s mouth

(see Fig. 2-15). Make sure that the long edge of the film or
phosphor plate is visible 1 to 2 mm buccal to the teeth.
­Position the patient so that the occlusal plane is ­parallel
to the floor. Aim the x-ray beam perpendicular to the
bisecting line between the long axis of the tooth and
the axis of the occlusal plane. For maxillary images, the
patient faces forward. For mandibular images, the patient
should turn the head to the opposite side to position the
x-ray machine pointing upward, 45° to the mandibular
teeth. If the patient faces forward, the tube head will be
blocked by the patient’s shoulders. The result of these
projections should provide a periapical view of the posterior teeth (Fig. 2-17). It is obvious that errors in the
vertical or horizontal plane can easily be made, and that
foreshortening or elongation and/or overlapping of proximal surfaces can easily occur.

Localization Techniques
One method of localizing embedded or unerupted
teeth involves the buccal object rule (also referred to
as the parallax technique or the “same lingual opposite
buccal” [SLOB] rule), which states that the image of any
buccally oriented object appears to move in the opposite direction from a moving x-ray source. Conversely,
the image of any lingually oriented object appears to
move in the same direction as a moving x-ray source
(Fig. 2-18).

28

Chapter 2

n

Radiographic Techniques

A

B

C

E

D

F

G

Figure 2-14 An occlusal radiograph in the maxilla should be taken with the patient in an upright position in the chair, with the

occlusal plane (red line) horizontal to the floor and the x-ray beam (blue arrow) aimed at 60° to 65° through the bridge of the
nose. The radiograph on the right shows the type of image obtained with this technique. The middle image illustrates that
this technique does not necessitate the use of size 4 film or phosphor storage plates, but that size 2 will suffice (both images
are from the same patient, but taken at different times). The bottom images illustrate the use of this technique in younger patients in the primary dentition and the mixed dentition, and in a special-needs patient with a dento-alveolar trauma (bottom
right).

Chapter 2

A

B

n

Radiographic Techniques

29

Most current panoramic machines enable one to take
bitewing look-alike images (Fig. 2-19). These images should
be interpreted with caution since a standard bitewing projection requires that the image receptor be placed parallel
to the teeth, with the x-ray beam directed perpendicular
to the receptor. The panoramic bitewing is re-created from
the existing panoramic image; nevertheless, it is a very useful alternative when a patient cannot tolerate the intraoral
image receptor. However, it should not be used as a standard bitewing projection. Panoramic machines are available
with solid-state sensors or with a cassette system. Film-based
panoramic cassettes contain intensifying screens that convert x-radiation to visible light. Phosphor plate panoramic
cassettes do not contain intensifying screens.

Cephalometric Imaging
C

D
Figure 2-15 Illustration of wooden tongue depressors used

to protect the film or phosphor plate from being bitten during positioning and/or exposure. The top two images are
for anterior use and the bottom two are for posterior use.
The image receptor is taped between two tongue depressors. The patient can bite down on them to avoid permanent damage to a phosphor plate. The tongue depressors
provide guidance to the radiographer to assess the level of
the occlusal plane or can provide assistance to the caregiver
who assists during the radiographic procedure.

Using this principle for localization, the practitioner
makes two radiographs of the unerupted tooth. The technique consists of positioning the patient’s head so that
the sagittal plane is perpendicular to the floor and the
ala-tragus line is parallel to the floor. An intraoral periapical film is placed in the mouth and then exposed by
the paralleling technique. Subsequently, a second film is
placed in the mouth in the same position as the first film,
with the patient’s head position remaining the same, but
with the horizontal angle shifted either anteriorly or posteriorly depending on the site. The object in the projection
that moved in the direction opposite that in which the xray machine was moved is located more buccally, relative
to the object(s) that moved in the same direction as the
x-ray machine.

EXTRAORAL RADIOGRAPHY
Panoramic Imaging
The panoramic image is obtained through tomography.
This means that only the structures located in the focal
trough are captured in focus. Objects or structures outside
the focal trough should be interpreted with care. Because
of the projection geometry, panoramic images are magnified (by a factor of around 1.3), so measurements taken
from a panoramic image will also be magnified.

This technique is usually used in orthodontics and orthognathic surgery. Some machines will use a single exposure, which minimizes motion errors. In the scanning
machines, the exposure takes longer; hence there is a
higher risk for motion artifacts in these images. Positioning of the patient in the cephalostat is very important.
Remember that digital imaging does not correct or compensate for improper patient positioning.

Oblique Lateral Radiography
This technique offers an excellent alternative to bitewing
radiographs, periapical radiographs, or panoramic images, when patients are unable to tolerate these techniques.
The technique requires a cassette system (analog film or
phosphor storage plate), held parallel to the midsagittal plane of the patient, while the x-ray beam is directed
perpendicular to the cassette from behind or below the
mandibular body. Figure 2-20 demonstrates the positioning of the patient, image receptor, and tube head. Figure
2-19 provides two examples of oblique lateral projections.
This technique should not be regarded as a standard of
care for every patient. Special-needs patients and small
children can definitely benefit from this technique if a
radiographic image is required.

Cone Beam Computed Tomography
This technology has become very popular in the past decade and has found its way into many private practices.
This modality is ideal for imaging hard tissues. Artifacts
due to beam hardening and motion artifacts are to be
avoided (Fig. 2-21). The radiation dose from CBCT is considerably higher than that from a periapical radiograph.
It is also very hard to determine the radiation dose in
general from CBCT since it depends on exposure settings
(kVp, mA, and exposure time), field of view (the size of
the volume, which is determined by the size of the coneshaped x-ray beam), and the resolution of the image (the
details). Justification to expose pediatric patients to CBCT
should not be taken lightly.

Medical Computed Tomography
Medical CT is responsible for the highest radiation doses
a patient can receive from diagnostic imaging. The fanshaped beam rotates around the patient’s body (part) in
a helical motion. The space between two rotations of the

30

Chapter 2

n

Radiographic Techniques

A

B

C

D

Figure 2-16 The top left image shows the position of the x-ray source (red arrow) 45° occlusal to the mandible. The bottom

left shows an example of this projection. The top right image shows the position of the x-ray source (blue arrow) 90° occlusal
to the mandible. The bottom right shows an example of this projection (patient with a small piece of a metal rod in the floor
of the mouth).
beam (pitch) determines the resolution of the image and
hence the radiation dose. Medical CT, also called multislice CT, is useful for the imaging of hard and soft tissues
and provides the clinician with the ability to detect very
small differences in density in the image (contrast resolution). The technique is usually used to identify malignancies, tumors, and other symptoms of pathology, with or
without the use of contrast medium.

Ultrasound Imaging
Most people associate ultrasound imaging with pregnancy, but this technique also is excellent for investigation
of soft tissues, such as the floor of the mouth, salivary
glands, and lymph nodes in the head and neck region.
Since the technique does not involve ionizing radiation,
it can be repeated as many times as necessary, without exposing the patient to any risks. Figure 2-22 displays an ultrasonogram of the floor of the mouth as an illustration of
an investigation to evaluate swelling or foreign objects in
the soft tissues in this region. In addition, this technique
is appropriate when fine-needle aspirations are required.

Magnetic Resonance Imaging
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) evaluates the hydrogen content of tissues and uses a magnetic field to differentiate among different tissue types. Since there are more
hydrogen atoms in soft tissues than in cortical bone, this
technique is especially useful with soft tissue. Contraindications for MRI include claustrophobia and the presence
of metallic clips or metallic foreign bodies. The most common dental indication for the use of MRI is for imaging
the soft tissues of the temporomandibular joint (Fig. 2-23).

SELECTION CRITERIA AND
RADIOGRAPHIC EXAMINATIONS
CRITERIA FOR EXPOSING CHILDREN
TO IONIZING RADIATION
For all radiographic examinations, the same basic rules
apply: justification and professional judgment on an individual patient basis. There are no guidelines per age
group, gender, or dentition stage. The American Dental

Chapter 2

A

B

C

D

n

Radiographic Techniques

31

Figure 2-17 Illustrations of radiographs obtained with the oblique occlusal technique in the lateral regions of the dentition in

various pediatric patients and patients with special needs.

A

B

Figure 2-18 The buccal object rule or parallax technique il-

lustrated to determine the position of an impacted maxillary
canine. In the left radiograph, the tip of the canine coincides with the mesial wall of the pulp canal of the left central incisor, whereas in the right, it coincides with the distal
wall. From the latter, one can conclude that the canine is
lingually impacted, since it moved in the same direction as
the x-ray source.

Association (ADA), the American Academy for Pediatric
Dentistry (AAPD), the European Academy for Pediatric
Dentistry (EAPD), and other organizations have published
criteria that are meant to guide the dental professional in
decision-making regarding appropriate radiographic imaging (Table 2-5). These guidelines clearly state that if the
patient cannot cope with the procedure, one should attempt other strategies to handle the situation. The guidelines all acknowledge that, in some cases, radiographs
are not possible, in which case, one should balance the
benefit against the risk even more carefully. Sometimes it
is better to postpone the radiographic exposure until the
patient is older or better conditioned. The guidelines also
clearly state that if there are no clinical signs of pathology, the need for a radiographic assessment is up to the
professional’s judgment, and that these decisions have
to be made on an individual patient basis. Radiographs
are never to be used for economic and screening reasons
since they involve a potential health risk for the patient.
Here are some examples of how the guidelines can be
interpreted and implemented. A 3-year-old with a sound
dentition and open proximal contacts does not need a
radiographic assessment. In contrast, for a 3-year-old with
only 10 teeth visible in the mouth and no history of dental
treatment, the dental professional should make a radiographic assessment. If a 4-year-old shows rampant decay,
a radiographic assessment is certainly justifiable and indicated. A 7-year-old with a normal transitional dentition

32

Chapter 2

n

Radiographic Techniques

A

L

radiographic examination are necessary. Contusions,
crown fractures, root fractures, and avulsions are among
the many injuries that require radiographic assessment.
The number and frequency of radiographs needed, however, are not entirely clear from the literature. Since most
accidents involve the maxillary incisors, periapical and occlusal radiographs are likely to be part of the radiographic
assessment. This means that x-rays are being aimed at the
thyroid gland, which is a radiosensitive organ and should
be avoided as much as possible. CBCT is not often needed
since periapical radiographs, taken from two different angles, can often provide enough information for a proper
diagnosis. However, if a root fracture is suspected, a cone
beam image at sufficient resolution (200 μm) can be useful. The potential for motion artifacts in CBCT imaging
of pediatric patients must be considered when selecting
a radiographic technique. When mandibular fracture is
suspected, panoramic radiography is the technique of
choice; CBCT might also be worth considering.

RADIOGRAPHIC EXPOSURES IN SPECIAL-NEEDS
PATIENTS

B

This group of patients should not be exempted from radiographic assessment. The same selection criteria apply,
but the clinician must assess the ability of the patient to
cooperate before performing any imaging. Lateral oblique
or oblique lateral radiographs and (oblique) occlusal radiographs may prove to be very useful in this patient
population. Nevertheless, if the patient cannot tolerate or
if the patient cannot cope with the technique required
to obtain good-quality images, the clinician may have to
pursue an alternative treatment plan and postpone the
taking of radiographs until a more suitable moment (e.g.,
when the patient is under general anesthesia for a medical procedure).

INTERPRETATION OF RADIOGRAPHS

C
Figure 2-19 Examples of bitewing radiographs taken with a

panoramic machine (A, Planmeca ProOne; B, Planmeca S2
Pan; C, Planmeca S3 Promax).

and no caries history, and for whom bitewing images
had been taken 12 months prior, does not need a panoramic radiograph. The same 7-year-old, with a complete
primary dentition and no clinical signs of tooth mobility, might require a panoramic radiographic assessment.
Table 2-5 does not address the use of CBCT or medical
CT, but it is obvious that justification and common sense
should prevail when these examinations are prescribed
for or performed on pediatric patients or patients with
special needs.

RADIOGRAPHIC EXPOSURES IN CASES
OF DENTO-ALVEOLAR TRAUMA
Dento-alveolar trauma can occur in the primary, mixed,
and permanent dentition. Both clinical evaluation and

Radiographs should be evaluated under ideal conditions.
View boxes or monitors should be clean and positioned
in an area of diminished ambient light. Density and
contrast enhancements are essential tools for the assessment of digital images. These should be readily accessible
so that the clinician can enhance different areas of the
image with different enhancement tools. The clinician’s
ability to enhance the radiographic image dynamically
and differentially is a significant advantage over analog
film. Software filters can also assist in obtaining better images, but one should never overlook the fact that filtering
means loss of information. It is therefore paramount to
use all the information contained in the digital image,
which should be considered as a database and not merely
as an image displayed on the monitor.
As previously mentioned, it is clear that assessing radiographs in a brightly lit dental operatory increases the
clinician’s potential to miss diagnostically useful information contained in a radiographic image. Despite the
fact that the parents and patients appreciate viewing the
radiographic images in the operatory, the initial diagnosis
should not be made at the chairside monitor, but rather
in an area of the office where the light is dimmed.

Chapter 2

n

Radiographic Techniques

33

A
E

B

F

C

D
Figure 2-20 Lateral oblique radiographs are taken with a cassette, either containing analog film or a phosphor plate. The

patient or caregiver holds the cassette against the patient’s cheek. Cassette position is shown in relation to the x-ray source as
seen from the front (A) and bird’s-eye (B) view. The nose should then be rotated to touch the cassette, which consequently
provides a space between the opposite ramus of the mandible and the cervical spine, from where the x-ray source will be
aimed, perpendicular at the cassette (C and D). Left (E) and right (F) images obtained with this technique using phosphor
plate technology are shown.

34

Chapter 2

n

Radiographic Techniques

A

B

C

D

Figure 2-21 Illustration of beam-hardening artifacts. (top) Notice the black lines that cross the image and the white streaks

near the radiopaque material. (bottom) Illustration of patient movement. Notice the apparent broken bone on the left and the
non-diagnostic image caused by the patient moving his legs during the exposure in the right image. Cone beam computed
tomography images.

Chapter 2

n

Radiographic Techniques

35

1

2

3 2

2

3

1
3

4

5

Figure 2-22 Ultrasound image of the floor of the mouth.

The top of the image is the skin under the floor of the
mouth, and the bottom of the image is the tongue. (1) Skin
and platysma. (2) Anterior belly of both digastric muscles.
(3) Mylohyoid muscle. (4) Genioglossus and geniohyoid
muscles. (5) The tongue.

In case one has an image that cannot be diagnosed,
the assistance of an oral and maxillofacial radiologist may
be advisable. These professionals are well trained and can
spend more time evaluating the image. The radiologist’s
report can subsequently be used by the clinician and/or

Figure 2-23 Magnetic resonance imaging of the temporo-

mandibular joint: (1) cancellous bone of the condyle (surrounded by a black line, which is the cortical bone); (2) disc
of the joint; and (3) articular eminence with the dark line
representing the cortical bone, while the white line inferior
to that is the fibrous tissue anterior to the articular disc.

the pathologist and can be of assistance in developing
the treatment or follow-up plan for the patient. Oral and
maxillofacial radiologists can make recommendations on
the need for additional imaging as well as the imaging
techniques that should be used.

36
Chapter 2
n

Table 2-5
Patient Age and Dental Developmental Stage

Type of Encounter

Child with Primary Dentition
(prior to eruption of first
permanent tooth)

Child with Transitional
Dentition (after eruption of first permanent
tooth)

Adolescent with
­Permanent Dentition
(prior to eruption of
third molars)

New patient* being
evaluated for dental
diseases and dental
development

Individualized radiographic exam
consisting of selected periapical/
occlusal views and/or posterior
bitewings if proximal surfaces
cannot be visualized or probed.
Patients without evidence of
disease and with open proximal
contacts may not require a radiographic exam at this time.

Individualized radiographic exam consisting of posterior bitewings with panoramic
exam or posterior
bitewings and selected
periapical ­images.

Individualized radiographic exam consisting
of posterior bitewings with panoramic exam
or posterior bitewings and selected periapical
images. A full mouth intraoral radiographic
exam is preferred when the patient has clinical evidence of generalized dental disease or a
history of extensive dental treatment.

Recall patient* with
clinical caries or at
increased risk for
caries**

Posterior bitewing exam at 6-12 month intervals if proximal surfaces cannot be examined
visually or with a probe.

Posterior bitewing
exam at 6-18
month intervals.

Not applicable

Recall patient* with no
clinical caries and not
at increased risk for
caries**

Posterior bitewing exam at 12-24 month intervals if proximal surfaces cannot be examined visually or with a probe

Posterior bitewing
exam at 24-36
month intervals.

Not applicable

Recall patient* with
periodontal disease

Clinical judgment as to the need for and type of radiographic images for the evaluation of periodontal d
­ isease.
Imaging may consist of, but is not limited to, selected bitewing and/or periapical images of areas where
­periodontal disease (other than nonspecific gingivitis) can be identified clinically.

Patient for monitoring
of growth and development

Clinical judgment as to need for and type of radiographic
images for evaluation and/or monitoring of dentofacial
growth and development.

Posterior bitewing exam
at 18-36 month intervals.

Clinical judgment as to
need for and type of
radiographic images
for evaluation and/or
monitoring of dentofacial growth and development. Panoramic or
periapical exam to assess
developing third molars.

Adult, Dentate
or Partially
Edentulous

Adult,
Edentulous

Individualized
radiographic
exam, based
on clinical
signs and
symptoms.

Not applicable

Usually not indicated

Radiographic Techniques

Guidelines for Prescribing Dental Radiographs*

Patient with other circumstances including,
but not limited to,
proposed or existing
implants, pathology,
restorative/endodontic needs, treated
periodontal disease
and caries remineralization

Clinical judgment as to need for and type of radiographic images for evaluation and/or monitoring in these circumstances.

*Data from: American Academy of Pediatric Dentistry: Guideline on prescribing dental radiographs for infants, children, adolescents, and persons with special health care needs, Pediatr Dent
34(5):189-191, 2012.
Ad Hoc Committee on Pedodontic Radiology. American Academy of Pediatric Dentistry, reference manual, 2012.
The selection of patients for dental radiograph examination, American Dental Association and US Food and Drug Administration, JADA 137(9):1304-1312, 2006.
*Clinical situations for which ­radiographs may be
indicated ­include but are not limited to:

n

**Factors increasing risk for caries may include but
are not limited to:
1.	High level of caries experience or demineralization
2.	History of recurrent caries
3.	High titers of cariogenic bacteria
4.	Existing restoration(s) of poor ­quality
5.	Poor oral hygiene
6.	Inadequate fluoride exposure
7.	Prolonged nursing (bottle or breast)
8.	Frequent high sucrose content in diet
9.	Poor family dental health
10.	Developmental or acquired enamel defects
11.	Developmental or acquired ­disability
12.	Xerostomia
13.	Genetic abnormality of teeth
14.	Many multisurface restorations
15.	Chemo/radiation therapy
16.	Eating disorders
17.	Drug/alcohol abuse
18.	Irregular dental care

Chapter 2

A.	Positive Historical Findings
1.	Previous periodontal or endodontic
treatment
2.	History of pain or trauma
3.	Familial history of dental anomalies
4.	Postoperative evaluation of healing
5.	Remineralization monitoring
6.	Presence of implants or evaluation for implant
placement
B.	Positive Clinical Signs/Symptoms
1.	Clinical evidence of periodontal disease
2.	Large or deep restorations
3.	Deep carious lesions
4.	Malposed or clinically impacted teeth
5.	Swelling
6.	Evidence of dental/facial trauma
7.	Mobility of teeth
8.	Sinus tract (“fistula”)

9.	Clinically suspected sinus pathology
10.	Growth abnormalities
11.	Oral involvement in known or suspected systemic
disease
12.	Positive neurologic findings in the head and
neck
13.	Evidence of foreign objects
14.	Pain and/or dysfunction of the temporomandibular
joint
15.	Facial asymmetry
16.	Abutment teeth for fixed or removable partial
prosthesis
17.	Unexplained bleeding
18.	Unexplained sensitivity of teeth
19.	Unusual eruption, spacing or migration of
teeth
20.	Unusual tooth morphology, calcification or
color
21.	Unexplained absence of teeth
22.	Clinical erosion

Radiographic Techniques

37

38

Chapter 2

n

Radiographic Techniques

SUGGESTED READINGS
Al Najjar A, Colosi D, Dauer LT, Prins R, et al.: Comparison of
adult and child radiation equivalent doses from 2 dental cone beam computed tomography units, Am J Orthod
Dentofacial Orthoped 143:784–792, 2013. NCRP Report No.
145 Radiation Protection in Dentistry 2003.
American Academy of Pediatric Dentistry: Guideline on prescribing dental radiographs for infants, children, adolescents, and persons with special health care needs, Pediatr
Dent 34(5):189–191, 2012.
American Dental Association Council on Scientific Affairs: The
use of cone beam computed tomography in dentistry: an
advisory statement from the American Dental Association
Council on Scientific Affairs, JADA 143:899–902, 2012.
Amis ES, Butler PF, Applegate KE, Birnbaum SB, et al.: American
College of Radiology white paper on radiation dose in medicine, J Am Coll Radiol 4:272–284, 2007.
Aps JKM: Cone beam computed tomography in paediatric
dentistry: an overview of recent literature, Eur Arch Paed Dent
14:131–140, 2013 (doi 10.1007/s40368-013-0029-4).
Aps JKM: Theoretical assessment of the thyroid gland’s radiation dose from radiographs taken in dento-alveolar trauma
in pediatric patients, Pediatr Neonatal Care 1:e104, 2013.
Aps JKM: Three-dimensional imaging in paediatric dentistry;
a must-have or you’re not up to date? Eur Arch Paed Dent
14:129–130, 2013 (doi: 10.1007/s40368-013-0034-7).
Aps JKM, Scott J: Oblique lateral radiographs and bitewings; estimated organ doses in head and neck region with Monte Carlo
calculations, Dentomaxillofac Radiol 43:20130419, 2014.
Dental Radiographic Examinations: Recommendations for
Patient Selection and Limiting Radiation Exposure Revised
2012, ADA Council on Scientific Affairs, US Department of
Health and Human Services, Public Health Service, Food and
Drug Administration, 2012.
Espelid I, Mejàre I, Weerheijm K: EAPD guidelines for use of
radiographs in children, Eur J Paed Dent 1:40–48, 2003.
Horner K, Islam M, Flygare L, Tsiklakis K, et al.: Basic principles of use of cone beam computed tomography: consensus guidelines of the European Academy of Dental and
Maxillofacial Radiology, Dentomaxillofac Radiol 38:187–
195, 2009.
Kim S, Yoshizumi TT, Frush DP, Toncheva G, et al.: Radiation dose from cone beam CT in a pediatric phantom: risk
estimation of cancer incidence, Am J Roentgenol 1:186–190,
2010.

Kullman L, Al Sane M: Guidelines for dental radiography
immediately after dento-alveolar trauma, a systematic
literature review, Dent Traumatol 28:193–199, 2012 (doi:
10.1111/j.6000.9657.2011.01099).
Looe HK, Pfaffenberger A, Chofor N, Eenboom F, et al.: Radiation exposure to children in intraoral dental radiology,
Radiation Protection Dosimetry 121(4):461–465, 2006.
Ludlow JB, Davies-Ludlow LE, White SC: Patient risk related
to common dental radiographic examinations: the impact
of 2007 International Commission on Radiological Protection recommendations regarding dose calculation, JADA
139:1237–1243, 2008.
McGiff TJ, Danforth RA, Herschaft EE: Maintaining radiation
exposures as low as reasonably achievable (ALARA) for dental personnel operating portable hand-held x-ray equipment,
Health Phys 103(Suppl2):S179–S185, 2012.
Memon A, Godward S, Williams D, Siddique I, et al.: Dental xrays and the risk of thyroid cancer; a case control study, Acta
Oncol 49:447–453, 2010.
Parrott LA, Ng SY: A comparison between bitewing radiographs
taken with rectangular and circular collimators in UK military dental practices: a retrospective study, Dentomaxillofacial
Radiol 40:102–109, 2011.
Rush ER, Thompson NA: Dental radiography and equipment:
how they influence the radiation dose received at the level
of the thyroid gland, Radiography 13:214–220, 2007.
Schonfeld SJ, Lee C: Berrington de González A: Medical exposure to radiation and thyroid cancer, Clin Oncol (R Coll
Radiol) 23:244–250, 2011.
Strakakis J, Damilakis J, Gourtsoyiannis N: Organ and effective
dose conversion coefficients for radiographic examinations
of the pediatric skull estimated by Monte Carlo methods, Eur
Radiol 15:1948–1958, 2005.
White SC, Mallaya SM: Update on the biological effects of
ionizing radiation, relative dose factors and radiation
hygiene, Austr Dent J 57(1 Suppl):2–8, 2012.
Zhang W, Abramovitch K, Thames W, Leon I-LK, et al.: Comparison of the efficacy and technical accuracy of different
rectangular collimators for intraoral radiography, Oral Surg
Oral Med Oral Pathol Oral Radiol Endod 108:e22–e28, 2009.

CHAPTER

3

Acquired and Developmental
Disturbances of the Teeth and
Associated Oral Structures
s James K. Hartsfield Jr. and Angus C. Cameron

For additional resources, please visit the

website.

CHAPTER OUTLINE
COMMON DISTURBANCES IN
CHILDREN
ALVEOLAR ABSCESS
CELLULITIS
DEVELOPMENTAL ANOMALIES OF
THE TEETH
Odontoma
Fusion of the Teeth
Gemination
Dens Invaginatus (Dens in Dente)
EARLY EXFOLIATION OF TEETH
Hypophosphatasia
Cherubism (Familial Fibrous
Dysplasia)
Acrodynia
Hypophosphatemia (Familial or
X-Linked Hypophosphatemic
Rickets or Vitamin D–Resistant
Rickets)
Cyclic Neutropenia (Cyclic
Hematopoiesis)
Other Disorders
ENAMEL HYPOPLASIA
Hypoplasia Resulting from
Nutritional Deficiencies
Hypoplasia Related to Brain Injury
and Neurologic Defects
Hypoplasia Associated with
Nephrotic Syndrome
Hypoplasia Associated with
Allergies

Hypoplasia Associated with Lead
Poisoning (Plumbism)
Hypoplasia Caused by Local
Infection and Trauma
Hypoplasia Associated with Cleft
Lip and Palate
Hypoplasia Caused by Ionizing
Radiation and Chemotherapy
Hypoplasia Resulting from Rubella
Embryopathy
Molar-Incisor Hypomineralization
(MIH)
Treatment of Hypoplastic Teeth
Hypoplasia Caused by Fluoride
(Dental Fluorosis)
Enamel Microabrasion to Remove
Superficial Enamel Discolorations
PRE-ERUPTIVE “CARIES”
(PRE-ERUPTIVE CORONAL
RESORPTION OR PRE-ERUPTIVE
INTRACORONAL RADIOLUCENCY)
TAURODONTISM
INHERITED DEFECTS OF DENTIN
Dentinogenesis Imperfecta
(Hereditary Opalescent Dentin)
Dentin Dysplasia
AMELOGENESIS IMPERFECTA
ENAMEL AND DENTIN APLASIA
AGENESIS OF TEETH
Anodontia
Hypodontia (Oligodontia)

COMMON DISTURBANCES IN CHILDREN
Over the past half century, dental care for children
has become more readily available. Caries-preventive
programs have become more effective, and there has
been a steady decline in the incidence and prevalence
of dental caries in both primary and permanent teeth
among children worldwide (see Chapter 9). However,
according to the first United States Surgeon General’s
report on oral health in America, published in May
2000, dental caries remains the single most common
chronic childhood disease.1 Periodontal disease is also

Hypodontia and Palatally Displaced
Canines
Hypodontia (Oligodontia) and Cancer
Ectodermal Dysplasias
INTRINSIC DISCOLORATION OF
TEETH (PIGMENTATION OF TEETH)
Discoloration in Hyperbilirubinemia
Discoloration in Porphyria
Discoloration in Cystic Fibrosis
Discoloration in Tetracycline Therapy
Bleaching of Intrinsic Tooth
Discoloration
MICROGNATHIA
ANOMALIES OF THE TONGUE
Macroglossia
Ankyloglossia (Tongue-Tie)
Fissured Tongue and Geographic
Tongue (Benign Migratory
Glossitis)
Coated Tongue
White Strawberry Tongue
Black Hairy Tongue
Indentation of the Tongue Margin
(Crenation)
Median Rhomboid Glossitis
(Central Papillary Atrophy of
the Tongue)
Trauma to the Tongue, with
Emphasis on Tongue Piercing
ABNORMAL LABIAL FRENUM
Frenectomy

common; however, this is usually limited to the mild
gingivitis that will be experienced by most children. The
severe forms of periodontal disease involving bone loss
are rare in children and are found only in those with
altered immune function. Both caries and periodontal
disease are, for the most part, acquired and preventable
disturbances of the teeth and jaws. Other chapters of
this book are devoted to a more in-depth discussion of
the cause, prevention, and management of dental caries (see Chapters 7, 9, 10, 11, and 13) and periodontal
disturbances (see Chapter 14). Another large category
39

40

Chapter 3

n

Acquired and Developmental Disturbances of the Teeth and Associated Oral Structures

of acquired disturbances is injury to the teeth and supporting tissues (see Chapter 27).
Many children have orthodontic conditions that
justify corrective treatment, and for some of them the
condition is serious enough to be categorized as deforming or even as a disability. Approximately 1 in
1000 children in the United States is born with a cleft
lip or palate. These conditions are primarily developmental disturbances and are discussed in greater detail
in Chapters 5 and 23.

ALVEOLAR ABSCESS
An alveolar abscess may be acute or chronic and is associated with pulpal necrosis. In permanent teeth this is
usually a well-localized periapical lesion surrounded by
a fibrous capsule produced by fibroblasts that differentiate from the periodontal membrane. The primary tooth
abscess is usually evident as a more diffuse infection, and
the surrounding tissue is less able to isolate or “wall off”
the process. The virulence of the microorganisms and the
ability of the host to react to the infection probably determine whether the infection will be acute or chronic.
In its early stages the acute alveolar abscess may be diagnosed based on radiographic signs of periodontal ligament
space widening. The tooth may be sensitive to percussion and movement, and the patient may be febrile. The
symptoms of an acute alveolar abscess can be relieved by
antibiotic therapy; however, the main tenet of treatment
involves removal of the cause of the infection, namely,
the necrotic pulp tissue. Relief of the symptoms is more
efficient if drainage is also established (Fig. 3-1) through
the pulp chamber of the tooth (in the case of a permanent tooth) and/or the associated gingiva or by extraction
of the tooth. If extraction is selected as the best choice of
treatment at the emergency appointment and the patient
has an unremarkable medical history, concomitant antibiotic therapy is not always necessary. During this acute
infection phase, however, it is often difficult or impossible
to establish effective anesthesia for tooth extraction. It is
also considered unwise to inject local anesthetic solution
into inflamed and infected tissue; general anesthesia may
be required in severe cases. A significant collection of pus,
a spreading infection involving the floor of the mouth, or
posterior spread that might involve the orbit and cavernous sinus should be regarded as potentially life-threatening
emergencies requiring surgery.
Drainage through the pulp chamber of a primary
tooth is almost impossible if subperiosteal pus is present. Drainage through the pulp chamber of a permanent
tooth is established by creating a normal but complete,
traditional access cavity and instrumenting the canals to
permit drainage of the exudate. The endodontic instrument should not pass the root apex. After initial debridement and irrigation the opening to the chamber should
be closed unless exudate continues to drain. If pain occurs during the excavation of tooth structure to establish
drainage, the discomfort can be lessened if the tooth is
stabilized by the dentist’s fingers.
A chronic alveolar abscess is less painful and is defined
by a more distinct radiographic lesion. Patients who are systemically unwell will also have lymphadenopathy. Draining

A

B
Figure 3-1 A, Acute alveolar abscess associated with a pulp-

less second primary molar. B, Removal of the roof of the
pulp chamber to allow for drainage resulted in immediate
relief of pain. After the swelling is reduced, one can decide
whether the tooth is to be treated or extracted.

fistulas are frequently associated with chronic alveolar abscesses. Usually, antibiotic therapy is unnecessary except
in patients with an overriding systemic comorbidity (e.g.,
those patients with organ transplants or who are immunodeficient). Again, drainage and removal of the cause of
the infection are necessary through root canal therapy or
through extraction. If the lesion has only recently passed
the acute stage, there may be an indicative soft-tissue abscess with an accumulation of pus. In this situation, incision and drainage may be indicated in addition to opening
the tooth, especially if the tooth is to be treated endodontically. If the lesion is in an advanced chronic stage, drainage
may already be established as a natural reaction (Fig. 3-2).

CELLULITIS
Cellulitis is a diffuse infection of the soft tissues that is
seen more frequently in younger children. It is similarly
caused by primary or permanent pulpal necrosis and is
characterized by considerable swelling of the face or neck
due to collateral edema and a spreading fascial infection;
the tissue appears dark and brawny.
Cellulitis may be very serious and life threatening. It is
usually a result of severe untreated caries in patients who

Chapter 3

n

Acquired and Developmental Disturbances of the Teeth and Associated Oral Structures

A

41

B

Figure 3-3 A, Patient appears to be acutely ill because of an

infected permanent molar and resultant cellulitis. B, Use of
broad-spectrum antibiotics reduced the acute symptoms of
the disease and prevented extraoral drainage.

Figure 3-2 A pedunculated granulomatous lesion overlying

the canine but associated with a chronic draining alveolar
abscess of the maxillary right first primary molar.

receive irregular, symptomatic dental care or who may have
had dental care only for treatment of dental emergencies.
Such children commonly come to the hospital emergency
department, where they appear acutely ill and may have a
high fever (greater than 40°C) with malaise and lethargy.
If a maxillary tooth is involved, the swelling and redness may involve the eye (Fig. 3-3, A) and, if untreated,
may spread posteriorly to involve the brain with an abscess
or cavernous sinus thrombosis. Cellulitis resulting from
an infected mandibular tooth will spread to the floor of
the mouth along the fascial planes. An infection involving submandibular, sublingual, and submental spaces is
termed Ludwig’s angina. In this condition the tongue and
floor of the mouth become elevated to the extent that the
patient’s airway is obstructed and swallowing is impossible.
These cases usually require extraction of the primary
tooth or the establishment of drainage in permanent
teeth, if possible, by opening the pulp chamber of the
affected tooth. However, the child may have difficulty
opening the mouth to permit the procedure; also, incision of soft tissue to establish drainage is not indicated in
the early stages of cellulitis because of the diffuse, poorly
localized nature of the infection. Antibiotics are usually
indicated in these children.
The cultures isolated from these dental infections are
usually of mixed flora, predominantly gram-positive facultative anaerobic microorganisms. They are usually capable
of producing hyaluronidase and fibrinolysins, which break
down the intercellular cementing substance (hyaluronic
acid) and fibrin, thus permitting rapid spread of the infection. A broad-spectrum antibiotic should be prescribed early to reduce the possibility of the infection localizing and
draining on the outer surface of the face (see Fig. 3-3, B),
and penicillin remains the drug of first choice in nonallergic patients. It should be emphasized to the patient or parents that antibiotics will not heal the condition completely
and that follow-up treatment of the tooth is essential.

In severe infections, pus or exudate must be taken for
culture. Many anaerobic microorganisms will not be identified in such cultures unless specific tests are performed.
Nonetheless, if the infection does not respond to the initial antibiotic therapy, a second, more appropriate antibiotic may be selected after the causative organisms have
been identified. Molinari has emphasized the continuing
emergence of antibiotic-resistant bacterial strains that
render many common antimicrobial agents ineffective.2
Hospitalization is required for children with severe cellulitis who are systemically unwell, those in whom the
clinical signs or symptoms warrant close monitoring, or if
there is any question as to whether the patient or parents
will follow through with the prescribed treatment. Hospitalization is essential in any case involving a spreading
infection of the floor of the mouth, such as Ludwig’s angina, because maintenance of a patent airway may require
the assistance of medical personnel. In these severe cases,
parenteral administration of antibiotics is recommended.

DEVELOPMENTAL ANOMALIES
OF THE TEETH
ODONTOMA
Abnormal proliferation of cells of the enamel organ
may result in an odontogenic hamartoma, commonly
referred to as an odontoma. An odontoma may form as
a result of altered proliferation of the dental epithelium and budding of the primary tooth germ. Odontomas may be compound, with multiple denticles, or
complex, presenting as a single mass of calcified tissue
(Figs. 3-4 and 3-5). An odontoma should be surgically
removed because it usually interferes with eruption of
teeth in the area. The presence of an odontoma should
alert the practitioner to inquire about the concurrent
presence of dysphagia or a family history of dysphagia,
perhaps due to hypertrophy of the smooth muscles of
the esophagus as a part of the rare autosomal-dominant
odontoma-dysphagia syndrome.3 Odontomas are discussed in detail in Chapter 28.

42

Chapter 3

n

Acquired and Developmental Disturbances of the Teeth and Associated Oral Structures

Figure 3-4 Compound composite odontoma. The anoma-

lous structure consists of small structures resembling teeth.

FUSION OF THE TEETH
Fusion represents the union of two independently developing primary or permanent teeth. The condition is usually
limited to the anterior teeth and, like gemination (see the
following discussion), may show a familial tendency. Fusion
of teeth involving only cementum is termed concrescence.
The radiograph may show that the fusion is limited to
the crowns and roots. Fused teeth will have separate pulp
chambers and separate pulp canals (Fig. 3-6). Dental caries may develop in the line of fusion of the crowns, necessitating the placement of a restoration. A frequent finding
in fusion of primary teeth is the developmental absence
of one of the corresponding permanent teeth.
Care of such patients requires a multidisciplinary approach involving pediatric dentistry, endodontics, surgery,
restorative dentistry, and orthodontics. Surgical sectioning
and separation of fused teeth are possible, and, although
dentin is exposed, such teeth are easily moved orthodontically without the risk of ankylosis. Diagnosis may be difficult using traditional radiographic techniques due to the
superimposition of adjacent structures or other teeth, and
cone beam computed tomography is useful in determining the extent and exact location of the fusion. Initially
the presence of a single primary and permanent maxillary
central incisor may appear to be a product of fusion. However, if the single tooth is in the midline and is symmetric,

Figure 3-5 Complex composite odontoma.

with normal crown and root shape and size, then it may
be either an isolated finding or part of the solitary median
maxillary central incisor (SMMCI) syndrome. This is a heterogeneous condition that may include other midline developmental abnormalities of the brain (various degrees of
holoprosencephaly) and other structures that can be due
to mutation in the sonic hedgehog (SHH) gene at 7q36,
the SIX3 gene, or other genetic abnormalities. SMMCI can
be a feature of recognized syndromes or a finding in patients with specific chromosomal abnormalities. The development of only one maxillary central incisor is an indication for further evaluation for other anomalies such as
short stature with or without growth hormone deficiency,
microcephaly, choanal atresia, midnasal stenosis, and congenital nasal pyriform aperture stenosis.4

GEMINATION
A geminated tooth must be distinguished from a fused
tooth. It represents an attempted division of a single
tooth germ by invagination occurring during the proliferation stage of the growth cycle of the tooth, in which case

Chapter 3

n

Acquired and Developmental Disturbances of the Teeth and Associated Oral Structures

43

Figure 3-6 Fusion of a permanent central and lateral incisor.

the geminated tooth appears clinically as a bifid crown on
a single root (Fig. 3-7). The crown is usually wider than
normal, with a shallow groove extending from the incisal edge to the cervical region. The anomaly, which may
follow a hereditary pattern of occurrence, is seen in both
primary and permanent teeth, although it probably appears more frequently in primary teeth.
The treatment of a permanent anterior geminated
tooth may involve reduction of the mesiodistal width
of the tooth to allow for normal development of the occlusion. Periodic “disking” of the tooth is recommended
when the crown is not excessively large, as is eventual
preparation of the tooth for restoration if dentin is exposed. However, if the crown is extremely large, the tooth
size may be unable to be masked, necessitating removal
and a combined orthodontic and prosthodontic approach
to rehabilitation.

DENS INVAGINATUS (DENS IN DENTE)
Dens invaginatus (or a tooth within a tooth) can be diagnosed radiographically. This developmental anomaly is a
lingual invagination of the enamel, and can occur in primary and permanent teeth. Unusual cases of dens invaginatus have been reported in a mandibular primary canine,
a maxillary primary central incisor, and a mandibular second primary molar. It is most often seen in the permanent
maxillary lateral incisors, and presence of deep lingual pits
should arouse suspicion. Grahnen and colleagues, in a study
of 58 families, found that more than one third of the parents of children with dens invaginatus had dens invaginatus or deep lingual pits,5 indicating autosomal-dominant

Figure 3-7 Gemination of a mandibular lateral incisor. The

crown has a groove on the labial surface and is wider than
normal.
inheritance with variable expressivity and possibly incomplete penetrance (see Chapter 5 for definitions).
Anterior teeth with dens invaginatus are usually of normal shape and size. In other areas of the mouth, however,
the tooth can have an anomalous appearance. A dens invaginatus is characterized by an invagination lined with
enamel and the presence of a foramen cecum, with the
probability of communication between the cavity of the
invagination and the pulp chamber (Fig. 3-8).
Application of sealant or a restoration in the opening of
the invagination is the recommended treatment to prevent
pulpal involvement. If the condition is detected before complete eruption of the tooth, gingival tissue must be removed
to facilitate cavity preparation and restoration. A common
presentation may be tooth necrosis, and the child may have
an acute abscess. The prognosis of such teeth depends on
pulp morphology and restorability of the crown (Fig. 3-9).

EARLY EXFOLIATION OF TEETH
Variations in both the time of eruption and the time of
exfoliation of the primary teeth are frequently observed
in pediatric patients. A variation of as much as 18 months
in the exfoliation time of primary teeth may be considered normal. However, this pattern must be consistent
with other aspects of dental development. Exfoliation of
teeth in the absence of trauma in children younger than

44

Chapter 3

n

Acquired and Developmental Disturbances of the Teeth and Associated Oral Structures

A

B

C

Figure 3-8 A, Small, “nonsticky” pits on the lingual surfaces of the maxillary lateral incisors are the only clues to the dens in

dente condition of the teeth revealed radiographically in B and C.

5 years of age merits special attention because it can be
related to local or systemic pathology.
Early exfoliation of primary teeth due to periodontitis
is uncommon and demands investigation (see Chapters 5
and 14). Along with hypophosphatasia, periodontitis secondary to immune deficiency or dysfunction appears to
be the most common cause of premature exfoliation of
the primary teeth. The term “aggressive periodontitis” replaced the terms “early-onset,” “prepubertal,” and “juvenile periodontitis” at a 1999 International Workshop for
the classification of periodontal diseases and conditions,
where it was decided that the classification terminology should not be age-dependent or require knowledge
of rates of progression.6 Aggressive periodontitis can be
formed by a mutation in the CTSA gene that codes for
cathepsin C. Mutations in CTSA can also result in HaimMunk syndrome or Papillon-Lefèvre syndrome.7,8

HYPOPHOSPHATASIA
The clinical dental finding for the diagnosis of hypophosphatasia in children is premature exfoliation of

the anterior primary teeth associated with deficient
cementum. The loss of teeth in the young child may
be spontaneous or may result from a minimal trauma
in the absence of gingival inflammation. The loss of
alveolar bone may be limited to the anterior region.
Hypophosphatasia is characterized by improper mineralization of bone caused by deficient tissue-nonspecific
alkaline phosphatase activity in serum, liver, bone, and
kidney. Increased levels of urinary phosphoethanolamine and serum pyridoxal-5’-phosphate (vitamin B6)
are also seen since alkaline phosphatase acts in vitamin
B6 metabolism.
Ongoing study into the etiology of hypophosphatasia indicates that the usually lethal autosomal-recessive infantile
type (I), the usually autosomal-recessive milder juvenile type
(II), and the autosomal-dominant adult type (III) are due to
different mutations and heterozygosity vs. homozygosity in
the tissue-nonspecific isoenzyme of the alkaline phosphatase (ALPL) gene. Hu and colleagues state that, as a general
rule, the earlier the appearance of the disease, the greater
its severity.9 Early exfoliation of the primary teeth is usually

Chapter 3

n

Acquired and Developmental Disturbances of the Teeth and Associated Oral Structures

Figure 3-9 Dens in dente in a maxillary lateral incisor.
A communication between the invagination and the pulp
chamber apparently caused pulpal necrosis.

associated with the juvenile type (II), although such a
history may also be present in the adult type (III).9 Diagno­
stic tests should include the determination of serum alkaline
phosphatase levels in parents and siblings.
Pseudohypophosphatasia, first described by Scriver
and Cameron, is a rare disorder in which the child has the
phenotype of juvenile hypophosphatasia and elevated
levels of urinary phosphoethanolamine, but plasma alkaline phosphatase activity is normal.10 However, the clinical
findings are similar to those of juvenile hypophosphatasia.
Pseudohypophosphatasia occurs when there is alkaline
phosphatase activity toward artificial substrates, with a
lack of activity toward endogenous substrates, resulting
in a clinical picture indistinguishable from that of classic
hypophosphatasia.

CHERUBISM (FAMILIAL FIBROUS DYSPLASIA)
Cherubism is a rare childhood disease affecting jaw development. The children have “chubby” facies and upturned
eyes, giving the condition its name. Cherubism is usually
inherited as an autosomal-dominant trait, with somewhat reduced penetrance in females. The expression may
be so variable that a parent who appears to be clinically
normal may have a history of prominent facial swellings
or radiographic evidence of an abnormal bone pattern
in the mandible. Although disease progression is expected to stabilize or even regress after puberty, a few very
aggressive cases, sometimes producing morbid results,
have been reported.11 At least four cases of nonfamilial

45

cherubism have been reported, suggesting occasional
sporadic occurrences from spontaneous mutations.
Cherubism may also be associated with the rare, apparently autosomal-recessive, Ramon syndrome (cherubism,
eye anomalies, epilepsy, mental deficiency, hypertrichosis,
lack of growth, juvenile rheumatoid arthritis, and gingival
fibromastosis).12
The gene for cherubism has been mapped to chromosome 4p16, and follow-up work by Ueki and colleagues
found that mutations in the gene encoding c-Abl–
binding protein SH3BP2 on chromosome 4p16.3 cause
cherubism.13 They found several different SH3BP2 gene
mutations in patients with cherubism, which probably resulted in a gain-of-function or dominant-negative effect,
although other gene(s) may also cause cherubism in other patients. They postulated that the onset of cherubism
and its anatomically circumscribed characteristics may
be related to dental developmental processes in children,
when signals unique to the mandible and maxilla are
transmitted through the extracellular matrix, triggered by
the eruption of secondary teeth.
Characteristically there is a symmetric enlargement of
the jaws that may be noted at an early age. Radiographically the condition presents multilocular areas of bone
destruction (soap-bubble lesions) and thinning of the cortical plate (Fig. 3-10). Teeth in the involved area may exfoliate prematurely because of the loss of support or root
resorption or, in permanent teeth, because of interference
in the development of roots. Spontaneous loss of teeth
may occur, or the child may pull the teeth from the soft
tissue. Developing permanent teeth are usually ectopic,
being displaced by the growing lesion.
McDonald and Shafer reported a case in which the
mandible and maxilla of a 5-year-old girl were symmetrically enlarged.14 Radiographs showed multilocular cystic
involvement of both mandible and maxilla. A complete
skeletal survey failed to reveal similar lesions in other
bones. Microscopic examination of a segment of bone
showed a large number of multinucleated giant cells scattered diffusely throughout a cellular stroma. The giant
cells were large and irregular in shape and contained from
30 to 40 nuclei. During a 10-year observation period, the
bony lesions had not progressed appreciably.
The patient illustrated in Figure 3-10 was followed into
adulthood, and her mouth was restored satisfactorily. A
comparison of the full-face photographs in Figures 3-10,
A and I, illustrates that, as the face increases in height,
the “cherubic” appearance caused by the bilateral bulging of the bone of the mandible is less apparent. Seven
permanent teeth in the upper and lower arches were
retained and prepared for Baker attachments. Complete
dentures were constructed to restore function and improve appearance.
Pierce and colleagues have reported their 15-year dental management of a mother and two daughters with
inherited craniofacial fibrous dysplasia.15 The daughters
exhibited clinical and radiographic appearances similar
to those of the patient just described, but the authors
consider fibrous dysplasia and cherubism to be separate
entities. Their treatment of the daughters, though more
aggressive, resulted in nearly complete dentitions. Treatment included surgical autotransplantation of several

46

Chapter 3

Acquired and Developmental Disturbances of the Teeth and Associated Oral Structures

n

A

B

C

D
Figure 3-10 A, Enlargement of the cheeks caused by bilateral bulging of the bone of the mandible. B and C, Lateral and

anteroposterior cephalometric radiographs. Notice the displacement of the mandibular anterior teeth in a large area of bone
destruction, the locular cystic involvement of the mandible and maxillae, and the number of missing teeth. D, Full-mouth
radiographs demonstrating large areas of bone destruction and several missing teeth.

Chapter 3

n

Acquired and Developmental Disturbances of the Teeth and Associated Oral Structures

EA

F
B

G

HH

I
Figure 3-10, cont’d E through H, When the patient was 18 years of age, the permanent teeth with good support were pre-

pared for Baker attachments, and complete dentures were constructed. I, The restored mouth and improved appearance of
the adult.

47

48

Chapter 3

n

Acquired and Developmental Disturbances of the Teeth and Associated Oral Structures

teeth and bony recontouring. Orthodontic therapy was
also provided for one child. Orthodontics was recommended for the other child but was declined; her dental
alignment was acceptable 3 years after surgery. Von Wowern published an extensive review of the literature and a
36-year follow-up of families with cherubism.16

ACRODYNIA
Acrodynia or pink disease results from the exposure of
young children to minute amounts of mercury; ointments and medications are the usual sources of the mercury. Weinstein and Bernstein reported on 20-month-old
twin girls who came to a hospital with the classic signs
and symptoms of acrodynia.17 Further investigation revealed that the girls had been receiving once- or twiceweekly doses of a mercury-containing teething powder
during the preceding 4 months. Apparently such preparations are still available in some countries. Horowitz and
colleagues reported on two young brothers who received
a diagnosis of acrodynia after playing repeatedly with a
broken sphygmomanometer.18 Dental amalgam restorations do not cause acrodynia.
The clinical features of the disease include fever, anorexia, desquamation of the soles and palms (causing
them to be pink), sweating, tachycardia, gastrointestinal
disturbance, and hypotonia. The oral findings include
inflammation and ulceration of the mucous membrane,
excessive salivation, loss of alveolar bone, and premature
exfoliation of teeth.

HYPOPHOSPHATEMIA (FAMILIAL OR X-LINKED
HYPOPHOSPHATEMIC RICKETS OR VITAMIN D–
RESISTANT RICKETS)
As reported by Hartsfield, hypophosphatemia is the most
common inherited abnormality of renal tubular transport.19 Clinical features become evident in the second year
of life and include short stature and bowing of the lower
extremities in affected boys. Premature tooth exfoliation
is sometimes also a feature. The inheritance pattern of the
disease is usually X-linked dominant, and the disorder is
twice as common in females as in males. The HYP Consortium of investigators found mutations in the PHEX (also
called PEX) gene on the X chromosome in patients with
this condition.20
Other dental manifestations often include periapical
radiolucencies, abscesses, and fistulas associated with pulp
exposures in the primary and permanent teeth. Pulpal necrosis is caused by abrasion of the thin, hypomineralized
enamel, exposing the pulp horns that extend to the dentinoenamel junction or even to the external surface of the
tooth. Dental radiographs show rickety bone trabeculations and absent or abnormal lamina dura.
McWhorter and Seale found that 25% of their patients
with vitamin D–resistant rickets (VDRR) were affected with
abscesses in primary teeth.21 The results of their study indicated that the presence of one abscess is a predictor of future
abscesses in the same patient. The authors suggested that
early prophylactic treatment of all posterior primary teeth
with pulpotomies and stainless steel crown placement may
be the most conservative therapy for a patient with VDRR
who develops a spontaneous abscess. However, a follow-up

retrospective study by Shroff and colleagues found the success rate for prophylactic pulpotomies in these patients to
be only 44%.22 They concluded that, based on the currently available data, prophylactic pulpotomy therapy cannot
be recommended for patients with VDRR. They also suggested that a more aggressive approach involving prophylactic pulpectomy, as previously advocated by Rakocz and
colleagues, may be indicated in these patients and encouraged further investigation in this area.23

CYCLIC NEUTROPENIA (CYCLIC
HEMATOPOIESIS)
Cyclic neutropenia is an autosomal-dominant condition
in which affected individuals are at risk for opportunistic infection during intervals of neutropenia that occur
in a 21-day cycle concomitant with oscillation in bone
marrow blood cell production. Levels of monocytes,
platelets, lymphocytes, and reticulocytes also cycle with
the same frequency. Although, classically, the cycle has
been reported to be 21 days, it has also been reported to
occur every 15-35 days in 20 cases from five families.24
Thus the periodicity of the neutropenia and associated
oral ulcerations may be of greater diagnostic significance
than the actual length of time between manifestations.
Horwitz and colleagues found several different singlebase substitutions in the ELA2 gene encoding neutrophil
elastase (also known as leukocyte elastase, elastase 2, and
medullasin) in affected individuals and hypothesized that
a perturbed interaction between neutrophil elastase and
serpins or other substrates may regulate mechanisms governing the clocklike timing of hematopoiesis.25
The condition may appear at any age, and numerous
cases in children have been reported. The patients have
fever, malaise, sore throat, stomatitis, and regional lym­
phadenopathy as well as headache, cutaneous infection,
and conjunctivitis accompanying the neutropenia. Children exhibit severe gingivitis with ulceration. When the
neutrophil count returns to normal, the gingiva may return to a nearly normal clinical appearance. Children
­experiencing repeated insults from the condition have a
considerable loss of supporting bone around the teeth. A
case report by da Fonseca and Fontes describes a young
woman who had suffered from poor oral health throughout her lifetime, and as she approached 21 years of age,
all her remaining permanent teeth were finally removed.26
Soon after the extractions, her blood counts improved to
levels not previously seen by her hematologist. In some
children, the condition may disappear during adolescence.

OTHER DISORDERS
Premature exfoliation due to periodontal disease may be
caused by quantitative neutrophil disorders or qualitative disorders, including acatalasia, Chédiak-Higashi syndrome, or leukocyte adhesion defect (LAD). Early loss of
primary teeth is seen in other systemic conditions, such
as Coffin-Lowry syndrome, Down syndrome, Ehlers-Danlos
syndrome types IV and VIII, Hajdu-Cheney syndrome,
hyperpituitarism, hyperthyroidism, juvenile diabetes,
Papillon-Lefèvre syndrome, progeria, Singleton-Merten
syndrome, Langerhans’ cell histiocytosis (see Chapter 28),
and the leukemias (see Chapter 26).

Chapter 3

n

Acquired and Developmental Disturbances of the Teeth and Associated Oral Structures

ENAMEL HYPOPLASIA
Amelogenesis occurs in three stages. In the first stage,
the enamel matrix is secreted by ameloblasts and in the
second stage, it undergoes calcification; a final stage of
enamel maturation, with crystal growth and removal of
water and protein, continues until eruption. Local or systemic factors that interfere with normal matrix formation
cause disorders of tooth quantity with enamel surface defects and irregularities termed enamel hypoplasia. Factors
that interfere with calcification and maturation of the
enamel and are disorders of quality are termed enamel
hypocalcification.
Enamel hypoplasia may be mild and may result in a
pitting of the enamel surface or in the development of a
horizontal line across the enamel of the crown. If ameloblastic activity has been disrupted for a long period, gross
areas of irregular or imperfect enamel formation occur.
Generalized enamel hypoplasia is often seen as a component of many syndromes.
Postnatal hypoplasia of the primary teeth is probably as
common as hypoplasia of the permanent teeth, although
the former usually does not occur in as severe a form. The
hypoplasia of the primary enamel that occurs prior to birth
is less common and usually arises from complications of
premature birth (Fig. 3-11). In its mildest form, a prenatal
disturbance is reflected as an accentuated neonatal ring in
the primary tooth. In the severe type of neonatal disturbance, enamel formation is sometimes arrested at birth or
during the neonatal period (Fig. 3-12). Postnatal amelogenesis is confined to the portion of the crown located cervically from the enamel area present at birth (Fig. 3-13).
Seow and colleagues have observed that enamel hypoplasia of the primary teeth is common in prematurely
born, very-low-birthweight children; its pathogenesis is
not understood clearly,27 but it is likely to occur due to
neonatal hypocalcemia or hypoxia. An important local
factor is trauma from laryngoscopy and endotracheal intubation, which usually results in localized enamel hypoplasia involving only the left maxillary anterior teeth. Slayton
and colleagues examined 698 well-nourished and healthy
children from 4 to 5 years of age and found that 6% had at
least one primary tooth with enamel hypoplasia.28

Figure 3-11 Prenatal enamel hypoplasia. The medical

history revealed that the patient suffered from cerebral
palsy as a result of premature birth (gestation, 6
months; birth weight, 2 lb, 5 oz). (Courtesy Dr. Stanley
C. Herman.)

49

HYPOPLASIA RESULTING FROM NUTRITIONAL
DEFICIENCIES
Many clinical investigations have been undertaken to
determine the relationship between hypoplastic defects
of enamel and systemic disabilities. Relatively little importance has been placed on exanthematous fevers, but
deficiency states, particularly those related to deficiencies
in vitamins A, C, and D, calcium, and phosphorus, can
often be related to the occurrence of enamel hypoplasia.
Sarnat and Schour observed that, in a group of 60 children who had adequate medical histories, two thirds of the
hypoplastic disturbances occurred during infancy (from
birth to the end of the first year)29 (Fig. 3-14). Approximately one third of enamel hypoplasia was found in the
portion of teeth formed during early childhood (from 13
to 34 months) (Fig. 3-15). Less than 2% of enamel defects
found originated in late childhood (from 35 to 80 months).

Figure 3-12 Neonatal enamel hypoplasia. Only the most

cervical parts of the intrinsically stained areas are hypoplastic. The child experienced severe nutritional deficiency during the first month of extrauterine life. (Courtesy Dr. Stanley
C. Herman.)

Figure 3-13 Enamel hypoplasia that occurred during

infancy. A wide band of pitted enamel is evident on the
maxillary and mandibular permanent incisors and first
permanent molars. The child was severely affected with
pneumonia at 6 months of age. (Courtesy Dr. Stanley C.
Herman.)

50

Chapter 3

n

Acquired and Developmental Disturbances of the Teeth and Associated Oral Structures

of bright sunshine in each calendar month and the incidence of neonatal tetany 3 months later. This observation
suggested that enamel hypoplasia and neonatal tetany can
be manifestations of vitamin D deficiency during pregnancy
and are most likely the result of secondary hyperparathyroidism in the mother. A significantly higher mean
maternal age and a preponderance of lower social class
were also seen in the mothers of those in the tetany group.
In some children a mild deficiency state or systemic
condition without clinical symptoms can apparently interfere with ameloblastic activity and can produce a permanent defect in the developing enamel.

HYPOPLASIA RELATED TO BRAIN INJURY
AND NEUROLOGIC DEFECTS
Figure 3-14 Enamel hypoplasia that developed as the result

of a nutritional deficiency during infancy. The first permanent molars, maxillary central incisors, and mandibular
incisors show hypoplastic enamel and dentin.

Figure 3-15 Enamel hypoplasia occurred during early child-

hood. Enamel formation on the incisal third of the lower
incisors and the maxillary central incisors is normal.

Sheldon and colleagues sought to determine whether
the defects in enamel were related to the occurrence of
systemic ailments.30 They examined ground sections of
95 teeth from 34 patients for whom detailed medical histories were available. In more than 70% of the individuals, a positive correlation was established between the
time of formation of a band of defective enamel and the
existence of some systemic disability. However, defects in
enamel occurred in 23% of patients who had no history
of systemic conditions that might have produced enamel
defects. No enamel changes occurred in 6% of patients
who had histories of disabilities that had produced enamel changes in other patients. Deficiencies of vitamins A, C,
and D, calcium, and phosphorus were the most common
causes of defective enamel formation.
Purvis and colleagues, in a study of 112 infants with
neonatal tetany, observed that 63 (56%) later showed severe enamel hypoplasia of the primary teeth.31 Histologic
examinations revealed a prolonged disturbance of enamel
formation in the 3 months before birth. An inverse relationship was demonstrated between the mean daily hours

Herman and McDonald studied 120 children with cerebral palsy between 2.5 and 10.5 years of age (for whom
complete medical records were available) to determine
the prevalence of dental hypoplasia, and compared them
with 117 age-matched healthy children. 32 They observed
enamel hypoplasia in 36% of children with cerebral palsy
and in 6% of healthy children. A definite relationship between the time of occurrence of the possible factors that
could have caused brain damage and the apparent time
of origination of the enamel defect (based on its location
in the enamel on the crown of the tooth) was established
for 70% of the affected teeth of children with cerebral
palsy (see Fig. 3-11). Evidence of enamel hypoplasia is an
aid to the clinician and the research worker in determining when brain injury occurred in patients in whom the
cause is not clearly defined.
Cohen and Diner observed that enamel defects occurred with greatest frequency in children with low intelligence quotients and a high incidence of neurologic
defects.33 They found that chronologically distributed
enamel defects were a valuable aid in neurologic diagnosis because they occur commonly in children with brain
damage. In addition, the defects indicate the time of insult
to the developing fetus or infant, even when the history
is reportedly negative. Martinez and colleagues examined
170 children between 4 and 17 years of age (mean age,
12.03 years) with mental retardation and no history of
dental trauma.34 They found that 37% of these children
had dental enamel defects.

HYPOPLASIA ASSOCIATED WITH NEPHROTIC
SYNDROME
Oliver and Owings observed enamel hypoplasia in permanent teeth in a high percentage of children with nephrotic syndrome and found a correlation between the time of
severe renal disease and the estimated time at which the
defective enamel formation occurred.35 Similarly Koch
and colleagues found a high incidence of enamel defects
in the primary teeth of children diagnosed with chronic
renal failure early in infancy.36

HYPOPLASIA ASSOCIATED WITH ALLERGIES
Rattner and Myers discovered a correlation between
enamel defects of the primary dentition and the presence
of severe allergic reactions.37 Enamel defects were present
in 26 of 45 children with congenital allergies. The enamel

Chapter 3

n

Acquired and Developmental Disturbances of the Teeth and Associated Oral Structures

51

lesions were localized in the occlusal third of the primary
canines and first molars.

HYPOPLASIA ASSOCIATED WITH LEAD
POISONING (PLUMBISM)
Lawson and Stout observed that in areas of Charleston,
South Carolina, where there are very old frame buildings,
the incidence of pitting hypoplasia was approximately
100% greater than published standards or the incidence
in their control group of children.38 They suggested that
dentists treating children with unexplained pitting hypoplasia should consider previous exposure to lead as a part
of their health evaluation, particularly if the child is from
a family in a low economic stratum.
Pearl and Roland have pointed out that the fetus of a
mother with lead poisoning can be affected because lead
readily crosses the placenta during pregnancy.39 They observed significant delays in development and eruption of
the primary teeth in the child of such a mother. They
also listed pica (ingestion of unusual objects to satisfy an
abnormal craving) as a common sign of plumbism in children from 1 to 6 years old as well as in their mothers. One
mother admitted eating plaster from her apartment walls
during several months of pregnancy.

A

HYPOPLASIA CAUSED BY LOCAL INFECTION
AND TRAUMA
Enamel hypoplasia resulting from a deficiency state or a
systemic condition will be evident on all the teeth that
were undergoing matrix formation and calcification at
the time of the insult. The hypoplasia will follow a definite pattern. Individual permanent teeth often have hypoplastic or hypocalcified areas on the crown that result
from infection or trauma (Figs. 3-16 and 3-17).
Turner first described this localized type of hypoplasia.40 He noted defects in the enamel of two premolars
and traced the defects to apical infection of the nearest
primary molar. Enamel hypoplasia resulting from local
infection is called Turner tooth.
Bauer concluded, from a study of autopsy material, that
the periapical inflammatory processes of primary teeth extend toward the buds of the pertinent permanent teeth
and affect them during their prefunctional stage of eruption.41 The infection fails to stimulate the development of
a fibrous wall that would localize the lesion. Instead the
infection spreads diffusely through the bone around the
buds of the successors and thereby affects the important
protective layer of the young enamel, the united enamel
epithelium. Bauer found that in some cases the united
enamel epithelium was destroyed and the enamel was exposed to inflammatory edema and to granulation tissue.
The granulation tissue later eroded the enamel and deposited a well-calcified, metaplastic, cementum-like substance on the surface of the deep excavation.
A traumatic blow to an anterior primary tooth that
causes its apical displacement can interfere with matrix
formation or calcification of the underlying permanent
tooth. The trauma or subsequent periapical infection frequently produces defects on the labial surface of the permanent incisor (Fig. 3-18). The retention of infected primary
teeth, even if they are asymptomatic, is unjustifiable.

B
Figure 3-16 A, Infected mandibular second primary molar

has caused hypoplasia of the second premolar and delayed
eruption of the tooth. B, Hypoplasia is evident in the occlusal
third of the second premolar.
The development of hypoplastic defects on the permanent
tooth, its deflection from the normal path of eruption, and
even death of the developing tooth may result.

HYPOPLASIA ASSOCIATED WITH CLEFT LIP
AND PALATE
Mink studied the incidence of enamel hypoplasia of the
maxillary anterior teeth in 98 patients with repaired bilateral and unilateral complete cleft lip and palate; the age
of the individuals ranged from 1.5 to 18 years.42 Among
them, 66% with maxillary anterior primary teeth had one
or more primary teeth affected with enamel hypoplasia and 92% with erupted maxillary anterior permanent
teeth had one or more permanent teeth affected with
enamel hypoplasia. Mink concluded that the permanent
teeth are in earlier stages of development at the time of
the surgical procedure and are more subject to damage.
Vichi and Franchi, however, suggested that dental anomalies, including hypoplasia, probably result from multiple
causes.43 They emphasized the difficulty in understanding the role played by genetic factors, postnatal environment, nutrition, and surgical influences in the development of dental anomalies.

52

Chapter 3

n

Acquired and Developmental Disturbances of the Teeth and Associated Oral Structures

A
Figure 3-18 Hypoplastic defect on the labial surface of a

mandibular permanent central incisor (arrow). There was a
history of trauma to the primary tooth.

B

C
Figure 3-17 A, Only a root fragment remains as evidence of

a pulpless first primary molar. The infection has affected the
development of the first premolar. B, The second primary
molar has been exfoliated prematurely. The first premolar is
malformed as a result of the infection in the area. C, The malformed calcified mass (arrow) is surrounded by inflamed tissue.

HYPOPLASIA CAUSED BY IONIZING RADIATION
AND CHEMOTHERAPY
Numerous dental abnormalities may result in surviving children who receive high-dose radiotherapy and
chemotherapy during the time their teeth are forming.
Kaste and colleagues reviewed clinical and radiographic
records of 423 survivors of acute lymphoblastic leukemia
(ALL).44 Among these patients, they observed root stunting
in 24.4%, microdontia in 18.9%, hypodontia in 8.5%,

taurodontia in 5.9%, and over-retention of primary teeth
in 4%. The patients who were younger than 8 years old
at diagnosis or who received cranial irradiation (in addition to chemotherapy) developed more dental abnormalities than those older than 8 years at diagnosis and those
who did not receive cranial irradiation. They also noted
that the resulting dental defects could affect the survivors’
quality of life. The advent of intrathecal chemotherapy
has almost eliminated cranial relapse in children with
ALL and has reduced the need for cranial irradiation.
Maguire and Welbury point out that, as survival rates
for children with cancer improve, the emphasis in therapy has moved from saving children at all costs to saving
children at the least cost to the child, and therapy protocols are continually reviewed with this goal in mind.45
Children who receive high-dose radiotherapy for the
treatment of a malignancy are at risk for developing rampant caries in the irradiated area. The main cause is due to
reduced or destroyed major salivary gland function.
Ameloblasts are somewhat resistant to x-radiation.
However, a line of hypoplastic enamel that corresponds
to the stage of development at the time of therapy may
be seen (Fig. 3-19). Radiotherapy will have a more severe
effect on the development of the dentin, and root formation will be stunted. Occasionally the development of the
permanent teeth will be arrested (Fig. 3-20).

HYPOPLASIA RESULTING FROM RUBELLA
EMBRYOPATHY
Musselman examined 50 children (average age, 2.5 years)
with congenital anomalies attributed to in utero infection
with rubella.46 Enamel hypoplasia was found in 90% of
the affected children compared with only 13% of the unaffected children. Tapered teeth also occurred in 78% of
the children with a history of rubella (Fig. 3-21). Notched
teeth were present in nine of the affected children and
none of the unaffected children.

MOLAR-INCISOR HYPOMINERALIZATION (MIH)
It should be noted that interference with dental development at birth, or while the enamel of the permanent first
molars and permanent incisors is forming, may result in

Chapter 3

n

Acquired and Developmental Disturbances of the Teeth and Associated Oral Structures

Figure 3-19 X-radiation caused hypoplastic defect on the

crown of the first permanent molar (arrow) and stunting of
root development.

53

Figure 3-21 The mother of this child had rubella in the

eighth week of pregnancy. The primary teeth were tapered
and had a rough hypoplastic surface. The child had a patent ductus arteriosus, pulmonary stenosis, and a cognitive
disability. There was also a history of difficult feeding and
dehydration at 2 months of age. (Courtesy Dr. Robert
Musselman.)
sensitive as soon as they erupt. Satisfactory restoration
may not be practical at this time. The topical application
of fluoride has been found to decrease tooth sensitivity.
The application should be repeated as often as necessary
to reduce sensitivity to thermal change and acid foods.

HYPOPLASIA CAUSED BY FLUORIDE
(DENTAL FLUOROSIS)
Figure 3-20 Absence of developing premolars and the mal-

formed second permanent molar were caused by excessive
x-radiation.

a qualitative effect on the mineralization of one to four of
the first permanent molars with or without involvement
of the maxillary and mandibular permanent incisors. This
has been referred to as molar-incisor hypomineralization
(MIH). Although the mechanism(s) remain unclear, possible causes have been reported to include asthma, pneumonia, upper respiratory tract infections, otitis media,
antibiotics, dioxins in mother’s milk, tonsillitis and tonsillectomy, and exanthematous fevers of childhood.47

TREATMENT OF HYPOPLASTIC TEETH
The contention that hypoplastic teeth are more susceptible to dental caries than are normal teeth has little supporting evidence. Carious lesions do develop, however,
in the enamel defects and in areas of the clinical crown
where dentin is exposed. Small carious and pre-carious
areas may be restored with composite resin or a glass
ionomer. The restoration is usually confined to the area
of involvement. The occlusal third of the first permanent
molar often shows gross evidence of hypoplasia, and
treatment is necessary before the tooth fully erupts. The
most successful restorations for young children are those
involving full coverage, namely, stainless steel crowns.
Hypoplastic primary and permanent teeth with large
areas of defective enamel and exposed dentin may be

Excess ingestion of fluoride can affect ameloblasts during
the appositional, calcification, and maturation stages of
tooth development, causing the clinical entity called dental
fluorosis or mottled enamel. The appearance of enamel
affected by excessive fluoride during formation varies considerably. Although the more severe cases of dental fluorosis
are associated with a high level of fluoride consumption,
there is apparently considerable individual variation. The
affected enamel is often limited superficially to the outer
100- to 200-μm layer, with appearance ranging from fine
white flecks to brown opaque lesions and/or pitting.
Dental fluorosis is seen most often in permanent teeth,
but it has also been observed in primary teeth. Levy and
colleagues observed fluorosis of primary teeth in 12.1%
of 504 children,48 most often on second primary molars.
The middle of the first year of life seemed to be the most
important time with regard to the development of fluorosis in the primary dentition, based on their estimates of
fluoride ingested prenatally and during the first year of
life in these children. Otherwise, in relation to permanent
incisor fluorosis, the exposure to excess fluoride between
18 months and 3 years of age, when the enamel is maturing, is most important. It should be noted that the opacities present are areas of hypomineralization and porosity
in the enamel. The surface of newly erupted enamel is
subject to abrasion causing pits and stains and is termed
posteruptive breakdown.
The existence of a genetic influence on the development of fluorosis is supported by the finding that some

54

Chapter 3

n

Acquired and Developmental Disturbances of the Teeth and Associated Oral Structures

inbred strains of mice are much more susceptible to fluorosis than are other strains that receive the same fluoride
dosage under identical conditions. Studies of these differing mouse strains should identify candidate genes for
study in human cases of dental and skeletal fluorosis.49

ENAMEL MICROABRASION TO REMOVE
SUPERFICIAL ENAMEL DISCOLORATIONS
For many years some dentists have advocated the application of hydrochloric acid as an effective method
for destaining mottled enamel. McCloskey described
a technique, originally advocated by Kane, that used
18% hydrochloric acid on the affected enamel sur­
faces.50 Croll has proposed a modified procedure called
enamel microabrasion, in which a specially prepared
abrasive compound (Prema; Premier Dental Products,
King of Prussia, Pennsylvania) is applied to the discolored enamel areas, similarly to prophylaxis paste, using
a synthetic rubber applicator in a 10:1 gear-reduction
handpiece.51 Frequent rinsing with water and reevaluation of the tooth for color correction are required.
The instrumentation is continued until the undesirable
coloration is removed or until a noticeable amount of
enamel is being removed when the tooth is viewed incisally. Finally the abraded teeth are polished with a fine
fluoridated prophylactic paste and given a 4-minute
fluoride treatment (Fig. 3-22).
Croll and Helpin have introduced a new delivery system for the microabrasion procedure.52 A viscous, watersoluble abrasion slurry containing hydrochloric acid and
silicon carbide microparticles (Opalustre; Ultradent Products, South Jordan, Utah) is conveniently applied to the
tooth surface using a syringe. Bleaching of vital teeth may
be used in combination with enamel microabrasion to
help remove deeper intrinsic discolorations. (Bleaching is
discussed later in this chapter.)
Microabrasion may also be achieved by judicious polishing of the tooth surface with multifluted tungsten carbide burs.

A

B
Figure 3-22 A, Mottled enamel. Because the brown

pigmentation and white splotchy areas were objectionable, the teeth were treated by enamel microabrasion.
B, Much of the pigment has been removed by enamel
microabrasion.

PRE-ERUPTIVE “CARIES” (PRE-ERUPTIVE
CORONAL RESORPTION OR
PRE-ERUPTIVE INTRACORONAL
RADIOLUCENCY)
Occasionally the defects on the crowns of developing
permanent teeth are evident radiographically, even
though no infection of the primary tooth or surrounding area is apparent (Fig. 3-23). Muhler referred to this
condition as pre-eruptive “caries.”53 Such a lesion often
does resemble caries when it is observed clinically, and
the destructive lesion progresses if it is not restored. As
soon as the lesion is reasonably accessible, the tooth
should be uncovered by removal of the overlying primary tooth or by surgical exposure. The caries-like dentin is then excavated, and the tooth is restored with a
durable temporary or permanent restorative material.
In some cases, the lesion may be so extensive that indirect pulp therapy is justified (Fig. 3-24).
Mueller and colleagues reported caries-like, bilateral
intra-coronal radiolucencies in mandibular permanent

Figure 3-23 Pre-eruptive “caries” on the crown of an un-

erupted first premolar (arrow).

Chapter 3

n

Acquired and Developmental Disturbances of the Teeth and Associated Oral Structures

A

B

C

D

E

F

55

Figure 3-24 A and B, Pre-eruptive “caries” in a mandibular right first permanent molar that is still unerupted. C, Mirror view of
the lesion on the occlusal surface of the unerupted tooth. D, Mirror view of excavated cavity after gross caries removal. E, Mirror
view of temporary restoration 1 week postoperatively (dark spot on mesial marginal ridge area is an artifact). F, Nine months
postoperatively, patient had continued normal root development and eruption of the tooth. The temporary restoration remained
3 months before the tooth was re-entered and restored with amalgam. (Courtesy Drs. George E. Krull and James R. Roche.)

56

Chapter 3

n

Acquired and Developmental Disturbances of the Teeth and Associated Oral Structures

second molars of a 12-year-old patient.54 Both lesions
were successfully treated in a fashion similar to the treatment illustrated in Figure 3-24. Holan and colleagues reported three cases in which similar management of preeruptive tooth defects was successfully performed.55 Their
experience and a review of other reported cases suggest
that impacted teeth or teeth delayed in eruption may be
at higher risk for developing such lesions.
Seow and associates56,57 determined the prevalence of
pre-eruptive dentin radiolucencies in permanent teeth to
be 2% (in 6% of the study population) using bitewing radiographs and 0.5% (in 3% of the study population) using
panoramic radiographs. The authors emphasized the importance of careful study of radiographic images of unerupted
teeth so that early detection and treatment are possible.

INHERITED DEFECTS OF DENTIN
Two broad categories of heritable dentin defects, dentinogenesis imperfecta and dentin dysplasia, are identifiable,
each with distinct subtypes.

DENTINOGENESIS IMPERFECTA (HEREDITARY
OPALESCENT DENTIN)
Dentinogenesis imperfecta is inherited as an isolated
autosomal-dominant trait (“isolated” in this use means
that it occurs without other anomalies). Bixler and colleagues observed this pattern in a six-generation family in
which 34 members were studied.62 There were 100% penetrance and consistent gene expression within a sibship.
In a survey of 96,000 Michigan children, Witkop reported
a prevalence of 1 in 8000 with the trait.63 The anomaly
may be seen with osteogenesis imperfecta (Fig. 3-26).

TAURODONTISM
Lysell credits Keith with giving the name to the phenomenon known as taurodontism.58 This anomaly is characterized by a tendency for the body of the tooth to enlarge at
the expense of the roots. The pulp chamber is elongated
and extends deeply into the region of the roots (Fig. 3-25).
A similar condition is seen in the teeth of cud-chewing
animals such as the bull (Latin, taurus).
Jaspers and Witkop noted that taurodontism is found in
about 2.5% of Caucasian adults as an isolated trait as well
as in individuals with syndromes such as tricho-dentoosseous syndrome, otodental dysplasia, and X-chromosome aneuploidies.59 Mena observed a mother and seven
children, four of whom showed evidence of taurodontism
in the permanent or primary teeth, or both.60 This was
probably the first report of taurodontism of the primary
dentition as a definite family trait in children of African
heritage. Gedik and Cimen reported taurodontism of six
primary molars of a 7-year-old boy who had no syndromes
or systemic disease.61 Other pedigrees have been consistent
with autosomal-dominant or autosomal-recessive inheritance. The inheritance may also be polygenic. The clinical
significance of the condition becomes apparent only if vital
pulp therapy or root canal therapy is necessary.

A

B
Figure 3-26 A, Five-year-old girl with dentinogenesis imperFigure 3-25 Taurodontism. Notice the elongated pulp

chamber and short root canals (arrow).

fecta and osteogenesis imperfecta. The child had sustained
numerous fractures of the long bones. B, A fracture of the
tibia is evident in the radiograph.

Chapter 3

n

Acquired and Developmental Disturbances of the Teeth and Associated Oral Structures

A decade later, Witkop suggested that there are two distinct
diseases64 and recommended the terms dentinogenesis imperfecta for the disease that occurs in conjunction with
osteogenesis imperfecta and hereditary opalescent dentin
for the disease that occurs as an isolated trait. Shields and
colleagues proposed a new classification: (Shields) type I
dentinogenesis imperfecta and (Shields) type II dentinogenesis
imperfecta, respectively.65 In addition, the dentin defects
seen in the isolated Brandywine triracial population in
southern Maryland were termed (Shields) type III dentinogenesis imperfecta. These latter defects consisted of variable
expression of the features of (Shields) type I (without osteogenesis imperfecta) and type II, shell-like teeth, and
multiple pulp exposures (Fig. 3-27). In this condition,
normal dentin formation is confined to a thin layer next
to the enamel and cementum, followed by a layer of disorderly dentin containing a few tubules. The roots of shell
teeth are short, and the primary teeth may be exfoliated
prematurely.
Zhang and colleagues and Xiao and colleagues have
found mutations in the DSPP gene, which codes for the
two major noncollagenous dentin matrix proteins, dentin sialoprotein (DSP) and dentin phosphoprotein (also
known as phosphophorin), in patients with (Shields) type
II dentinogenesis imperfecta.66,67 Sreenath and colleagues
noted, in the Dspp knockout mouse, that the teeth have
a widened predentin zone and develop defective dentin
mineralization similar in phenotype to that in human
(Shields) type III dentinogenesis imperfecta; these findings imply that Dspp may also be involved in the latter
condition.68
The clinical picture of dentinogenesis imperfecta is
one in which the primary and permanent teeth are a
characteristic reddish-brown to blue-gray opalescent color. Soon after the primary dentition is complete, enamel
is worn and often breaks away from the incisal edges
of anterior teeth and the occlusal surfaces of posterior
teeth. The exposed soft dentin abrades rapidly, occasionally to the extent that the smooth, polished dentin surface
is continuous with the gingival tissue (Fig. 3-28). Radio­
graphs show slender roots and bulbous crowns. The
pulp chamber is large initially and undergoes obliteration

A

57

(Fig. 3-29). Periapical rarefaction in the primary dentition
is observed only occasionally. However, no satisfactory
explanation has been offered, because the condition
apparently is not related to pulp exposures and pul­pal
necrosis. Multiple root fractures are often seen, particularly in older patients. Crowns of the permanent
teeth often seem to be of better quality and have less
destruction. Occasionally they appear clinically normal

A

B
Figure 3-28 Dentinogenesis imperfecta. The primary teeth

are severely abraded. Enamel is breaking away from the
incisal edge of the lower permanent central incisors.

B
Figure 3-27 Shell teeth. The large size of the pulp cavities indicates the nonexistence of secondary dentin.

58

Chapter 3

n

Acquired and Developmental Disturbances of the Teeth and Associated Oral Structures

A

A

B

B
Figure 3-29 A, Slender roots with ribbon-like pulp canals

and bulbous crowns are characteristic of dentinogenesis
imperfecta. The primary molars show periapical rarefaction.
B, Root fractures are common in older patients.

(Fig. 3-30). There is some evidence of a genotype-phenotype correlation, with Malmgren and colleagues showing one DSPP missense mutation being associated with a
more severe phenotype in one family than that seen in
another affected family with a different DSPP missense
mutation.69
The treatment of dentinogenesis imperfecta is difficult
in both primary and permanent dentitions. The placement of stainless steel crowns on primary posterior teeth
may be considered as a means of preventing gross abrasion of the tooth structure. Full-coverage restorations may
be placed on the permanent teeth if the crowns need protection in late adolescence or young adulthood. Bonded
veneer restorations on anterior teeth have also been used
successfully for aesthetic improvement in patients with

C
Figure 3-30 A, Four-year-old child with dentinogenesis

imperfecta. B, The permanent teeth, in contrast to the
primary teeth, are normal in color. C, The radiograph shows
typical dentinogenesis imperfecta.

Chapter 3

n

Acquired and Developmental Disturbances of the Teeth and Associated Oral Structures

dentinogenesis imperfecta when full-coverage restorations are unnecessary. Unfortunately, the long-term prognosis of these teeth is poor, and, despite best efforts, they
are usually lost in early adulthood. A pragmatic approach
to treatment planning is required, especially in those patients with osteogenesis imperfecta.
Teeth with periapical rarefaction and root fracture
should be removed. Extraction of such teeth is difficult
because of the brittleness of the dentin.

DENTIN DYSPLASIA
Dentin dysplasia is a rare disturbance of dentin formation
that Shields and colleagues categorized into two types: radicular dentin dysplasia (type I) and coronal dentin dysplasia (type II).65 Both primary and secondary dentitions
are affected in dentin dysplasia type I, which is inherited
as an autosomal-dominant trait. Radiographically, the
roots are short and may be more pointed than normal.
Usually the root canals and pulp chambers are absent
except for a chevron-shaped remnant in the crown. The
color and general morphology of the crowns of the teeth
are usually normal, although they may be slightly opalescent and blue or brown. Periapical radiolucencies may
be present at the apices of affected teeth. Investigation of
individuals with dentin dysplasia type I associated with
extreme microdontia and aberrant crown morphology
disclosed homozygosity for a splice-site mutation in the
SMOC2 gene. Since parents and siblings heterozygous for
the mutation were not affected, the SMOC2 gene may not
be involved in dentin dysplasia type I without microdontia and aberrant crown morphology.70 However, it may be
involved in the developmental pathway that, with some
other alteration, may result in dentin dysplasia type I.
Dentin dysplasia type II is inherited as an autosomaldominant trait in which the primary dentition appears
opalescent and, on radiographs, shows obliterated pulp
chambers similar to those in dentinogenesis imperfecta.
Unlike dentinogenesis imperfecta, however, in dentin
dysplasia type II the permanent dentition has normal
color and radiographically exhibits a thistle tube pulp
configuration with pulp stones.
Dean and colleagues, noting the phenotypic similarity of dentinogenesis imperfecta, Shields type II, to that
in the primary dentition in dentin dysplasia type II, hypothesized that these conditions may be due to different
alleles of the same gene.71 Investigation of a family with
10 of 24 members affected in three generations showed
that the candidate region for the dentin dysplasia type II
gene overlaps the likely location of the gene for Shields
type II dentinogenesis imperfecta. They suggested that
a candidate gene for dentinogenesis imperfecta Shields
type II and/or III should also be a candidate gene for dentin dysplasia type II. Subsequently, Rajpar and colleagues
showed that a DSPP missense mutation was present in a
family with dentin dysplasia type II, thereby confirming
the hypothesis of Dean and colleagues.72 Further analysis
of the DSPP gene in patients with Shields type II denti­
nogenesis imperfecta or dentin dysplasia type II suggests
that these dominant phenotypes result from the disruption of signal peptide processing and/or related biochemical events that interfere with protein processing.73 This is

59

consistent with the assertion that dentin dysplasia type II
and Shields type II dentinogenesis imperfecta are milder
and more severe forms, respectively, of the same developmental disease.74

AMELOGENESIS IMPERFECTA
As noted in Chapter 5, amelogenesis imperfecta is a developmental defect with a heterogeneous etiology that
affects the enamel of both primary and permanent dentition. The anomaly occurs in the general population
with an incidence of from 1 in 14,000 to 1 in 16,000.
Amelogenesis imperfecta has a wide range of clinical appearances, with three broad categories observed clinically:
the hypocalcified type, the hypomaturation type, and the
hypoplastic type. Although amelogenesis imperfecta can
occur as part of several syndromes, Cartwright and colleagues confirmed that the trait itself could also be associated with a skeletal anterior open bite,75 although the
pathophysiologic relationship between amelogenesis imperfecta and open bite remains unclear.76
Progress has been made in unraveling the molecular
basis of the myriad clinical forms of amelogenesis imperfecta. Aldred and Crawford discussed the limitations
of the existing classification systems and proposed an
alternative classification based on the molecular defect,
biochemical result, mode of inheritance, and phenotype.77 They proposed two separate phenotypes, namely,
enamel that is predominantly hypoplastic (i.e., enamel
that is either uniformly thin, with spacing between adjacent teeth, or irregular, giving rise to pits or grooves)
or predominantly hypomineralized (i.e., with soft, poorly
formed enamel with altered color and translucency). Hart
and colleagues recommended a standardized nomenclature for describing amelogenesis imperfecta that causes
alterations at the genomic, complementary DNA, and
protein levels.78,79 Two clinically distinct forms of autosomal-dominant amelogenesis imperfecta—smooth hypoplastic amelogenesis imperfecta and local hypoplastic
amelogenesis imperfecta—are associated with mutations
in the enamelin (ENAM) gene located at 4q21. In addition, autosomal-dominant amelogenesis imperfecta can
be associated with mutation in the Kallikrein-4 (KLK4)
gene, and autosomal-recessive pigmented hypomaturation amelogenesis imperfecta with an enamelysin (MMP20) gene mutation, illustrating the heterogeneity of the
condition. An X-linked form (AIH1) has been found to
be associated with as many as 14 mutations in the amelogenin (AMELX) gene, located at Xp21.80 However, at least
one family has had the trait linked to another location on
chromosome Xq22-q28.81
The defective tooth structure is limited to the enamel.
On radiographic examination, the pulpal outline appears
to be normal, and the root morphology is that of normal
teeth. The difference in the appearance and quality of the
enamel is thought to be attributable to the state of enamel
development at the time the defect occurs. In the hypoplastic type, the enamel matrix appears to be imperfectly
formed; although calcification subsequently occurs in the
matrix and the enamel is hard, it is defective in amount
and has a roughened, pitted surface (Fig. 3-31). In the

60

Chapter 3

n

Acquired and Developmental Disturbances of the Teeth and Associated Oral Structures

Figure 3-31 Both the primary and permanent teeth are af-

fected by the hereditary anomaly amelogenesis imperfecta.
The enamel is pitted but hard.

A

B
Figure 3-33 A, Case diagnosed as amelogenesis imperfecta.

The permanent teeth have a thin covering of pigmented
enamel. B, The radiographs show essentially normal root
morphology. The crowns have a thin covering of enamel.

Figure 3-32 Hypocalcification type of amelogenesis imper-

fecta. The primary teeth were similarly affected. The enamel
surface is soft.

hypocalcified type, matrix formation appears to be of normal thickness, but calcification is deficient and the enamel is soft (Fig. 3-32). In both of these more common types
of the defect, the enamel becomes stained because of the
roughness of the surface and increased permeability.
In still another variant of amelogenesis imperfecta, a
thin, smooth covering of brownish-yellow enamel is present. In this type, the enamel does not seem excessively
susceptible to abrasion or caries (Figs. 3-33 and 3-34).
Congleton and Burkes reported three cases of amelogenesis imperfecta in which the patients also demonstrated taurodontism.82 Others have identified cases with
the clinical appearance of amelogenesis imperfecta and
taurodontism along with strikingly curly hair and increased bone density (especially of the skull), which has
been identified as trichodento-osseous syndrome (TDO).
Seow has suggested that some cases reported as amelogenesis imperfecta with taurodontism were actually cases
of TDO syndrome.83 Price and colleagues found that this
autosomal-dominant condition is caused by a mutation
in the distal-less homeobox gene DLX3.84 Even though
the taurodontism and amelogenesis imperfecta traits in

A

B

Figure 3-34 A and B, Left bite-wing radiographs of a

patient with amelogenesis imperfecta. Radiograph in B
was made 6 years after radiograph in A and demonstrates
the maintenance of a caries-free dentition despite the thin
enamel.

this condition are fully penetrant in affected individuals,
the osseous and hair features are variably expressed even
when the same deletion is present in a family—findings
that indicate that the variable expression is influenced by
other genes and/or environmental factors, although further studies by Price and colleagues indicated that TDO
syndrome and amelogenesis imperfecta of the hypomaturation-hypoplastic type with taurodontism are two genetically distinct conditions.85 Dong and colleagues found
that a mutation within the DLX3 gene homeodomain
is associated with amelogenesis imperfecta (hypoplastic-­
hypomaturation type) with taurodontism (AIHHT).
­Because a DLX3 mutation outside the homeodomain is
associated with TDO syndrome, they suggested that TDO
and some forms of AIHHT are allelic.86

Chapter 3

n

Acquired and Developmental Disturbances of the Teeth and Associated Oral Structures

Amelogenesis imperfecta may also be associated with
nephrocalcinosis syndrome, also called enamel-renal syndrome or Lubinsky syndrome. Inheritance appears to be
autosomal-recessive. In addition to hypoplastic enamel,
the teeth often fail to erupt and undergo resorption due
to the disappearance of the reduced enamel epithelium.
Histopathology of the gingiva, which may be enlarged,
reveals islands of odontogenic calcification.87,88 Nephrocalcinosis may be the cause of renal impairment but only
rarely end-stage renal failure, unless complicated by renal stones and recurrent infections.89 Since nephrocalcinosis is often asymptomatic and can be associated with
impaired renal function, dentists who see children with
generalized and thin hypoplastic amelogenesis imperfecta should consider a renal ultrasound scan and referral to
a nephrologist, if appropriate. Conversely, children with
nephrocalcinosis should also be considered for a dental
referral.88
The treatment of teeth with amelogenesis imperfecta–
like defects depends on the severity of the condition and
the demands for aesthetic improvement. When indicated,
the teeth can be prepared for full-coverage restorations.
For some cases of the hypoplastic types, bonded veneer
restorations may offer a more conservative alternative for
the management of the aesthetic problem of the anterior
teeth. Patel and colleagues have reported successful treatment with porcelain laminate veneer restorations.90

ENAMEL AND DENTIN APLASIA
Teeth with characteristics of both dentinogenesis imperfecta and amelogenesis imperfecta have been reported.
Chaudhry and colleagues reported such a case and called
the condition odontogenesis imperfecta.91 Schimmelpfennig
and McDonald observed a similar dentition and termed it
enamel and dentin aplasia.92 The primary teeth were essentially devoid of enamel, and the smooth, severely abraded
dentin was reddish-brown. Radiographs showed normal
alveolar bone around the roots of the teeth. Two teeth
had pulp exposure and pulpal degeneration (Fig. 3-35).
Radiolucent areas were present at the apices of the two
primary teeth, with exposed and degenerated pulps. The
pulp chambers and canals in all the primary teeth were
extremely large, with no evidence of becoming obliterated. In ground sections of the primary teeth, the dentinal tubules showed little evidence of a normal growth
pattern. They were few and irregular, with a tendency
toward branching. The cementum appeared normal and
was acellular. No evidence of secondary dentin formation
was found. A few fragments of enamel adhering to the
dentin appeared thinner than normal, and few normal
morphologic characteristics were present. The dentino­
enamel junction was atypical in that it lacked the characteristic scalloping.
The permanent teeth, when they erupted, were partially covered with a thin, gray, poorly coalesced coating of
enamel. Brown dentin could be seen on the labial aspect
of the central incisors and at the bases of the fissures of
the first permanent molars. Stainless steel crown restorations were placed even before complete eruption to protect the teeth from continued abrasion.

61

A

B

C
Figure 3-35 A and B, Severely abraded teeth are almost

entirely devoid of enamel. The outline of a large pulp chamber can be seen through a thin covering of dentin. The
mandibular second primary molars have pulp exposure.
C, Radiograph shows large pulp canals and large pulp
chambers. Apical rarefaction is associated with pulp
exposure of the second primary molar.

AGENESIS OF TEETH
ANODONTIA
Anodontia (i.e., complete failure of the teeth to develop)
is rare. Although agenesis of primary and/or permanent
teeth is often referred to as congenital absence, such teeth
would not, of course, be expected in the oral cavity at
birth unless they are natal teeth. Gorlin and colleagues
noted that, when agenesis occurs as an isolated (nonsyndromic) trait, the primary dentition is not affected, and

62

Chapter 3

n

Acquired and Developmental Disturbances of the Teeth and Associated Oral Structures

the inheritance is autosomal-recessive.93 Although dental
anomalies, including hypodontia and oligodontia, can
occur in many types of ectodermal dysplasia,94 anodontia
is unusual. However, anodontia or oligodontia may be a
part of the ectodermal dysplasia also affecting the skin,
hair, and nails, called odonto-onycho-dermal dysplasia
(OODD), which can be caused by homozygous or compound heterozygous mutations in the WNT10A gene.95,96
Mutations in WNT10A are also a significant cause of isolated (nonsyndromic) hypodontia.97 Thus other factors
and/or differences in the specific mutation of the gene
can result in syndromic or nonsyndromic selective or
complete dental agenesis.
Swallow reported on an 11-year-old boy who had a
complete primary dentition but no permanent dentition.98 Schneider also observed a 7-year-old white female
with primary teeth but missing permanent teeth.99 As is
usually the case with presumed autosomal-recessive inheritance, the hereditary background included no known
consanguinity in the family or history of anodontia or
ectodermal dysplasia in either the maternal or paternal
lineage. Although consanguinity increases the likelihood
that recessive traits or conditions will be expressed, most
affected individuals do not have a family history of inbreeding. An overlay denture, which is often the treatment of choice, was constructed for the patient. A comparable situation is shown in Figure 3-36. Laird reported
a similar patient in whom a complete primary dentition
was present, but the only permanent teeth were maxillary
first permanent molars.100 Witkop studied two families
in which both parents had peg-shaped or missing maxillary lateral incisors, which is an autosomal-dominant trait

Figure 3-36 A complete primary dentition without evidence

of permanent teeth in a 14-year-old girl.

with incomplete penetrance and variable expressivity,
and concluded that agenesis of the permanent teeth can
be an expression of the homozygous state of that gene.101
This hypothesis is also supported by the findings reported
by Hoo.102

HYPODONTIA (OLIGODONTIA)
Agenesis of some (fewer than 6) teeth (not including the
third molars) is referred to as hypodontia. The term partial
anodontia should not be used. Oligodontia is used to describe conditions when more than 6 permanent teeth do
not develop. Hypodontia is usually familial, although it
may occur sporadically (without a family history of hypodontia). It may also be found as part of a syndrome,
especially in one of the ectodermal dysplasias, although
it usually occurs alone (isolated). Note that isolated in this
usage means not occurring as part of a syndrome; it may
still be familial.
Any of the 32 permanent teeth may be missing. However, there is a propensity for the last tooth in each series
to be absent, namely, third molars, mandibular second
premolars, maxillary lateral incisors, maxillary second
premolars, and mandibular central incisors. This order of
frequency has been confirmed in studies by Glenn103 and
by Grahnen.104 The absence of teeth may be unilateral
or bilateral. Glenn observed, during an examination of
1702 children, that 5% had a missing permanent tooth
other than a third molar.103 In 97% of the children, the
formation of the second premolar could be detected radiographically at 5.5 years of age and that of the lateral
incisor at 3.5 years of age. The most preserved permanent
teeth are the maxillary central incisors, the first molars,
and the canines.
In addition to the already mentioned autosomaldominant hypoplasia or agenesis of the maxillary lateral
incisors, Vastardis and colleagues found the absence of
second premolars in one family showing an autosomaldominant pattern of inheritance to be caused by a mutation in the MSX1 gene located at 4p16.1.105 Hypodontia
associated with a heterozygous mutation in the MSX1
gene, with or without an orofacial cleft, has been referred
to as type STHAG1 (selective tooth agenesis 1). Ahmad and
colleagues demonstrated that hypodontia inherited in an
autosomal-recessive mode and associated with malformation of teeth, enamel hypoplasia, and failure of eruption
could be linked to 16q12.1.113 This type of selective tooth
agenesis has been referred to as type STHAG2. Further evidence for the genetic heterogeneity of hypodontia is provided by the finding of a frameshift mutation (resulting
in premature termination of translation and a shortened
protein) in the human PAX9 gene in a large family with
autosomal-dominant oligodontia.106 This type of selective tooth agenesis has been referred to as type STHAG3.
Hypodontia secondary to the WNT10A mutations already
mentioned is referred to as type STHAG4, which is linked
to 10q11.2-q21 from analysis of a large Chinese family
with dental agenesis ranging from hypodontia to anodontia, and is referred to as “He-Zhao deficiency.”107 ­STHAG6
oligodontia is caused by an apparently autosomal-recessive mutation in the LTBP3 gene.108 Mutations in the
X-linked EDA gene can cause nonsyndromic oligodontia

Chapter 3

n

Acquired and Developmental Disturbances of the Teeth and Associated Oral Structures

or hypodontia (STHAGX1),109 or hypohidrotic ectodermal dysplasia,110 generally affecting males more severely
in either case. Animal models of X-linked hypohidrotic ectodermal dysplasia secondary to EDA mutation, including
canine models, have shown that postnatal intravenous
administration of soluble recombinant EDA significantly
corrected the development of the adult teeth, and positively affected other components of the condition.111
Clinical trials with postnatal intravenous administration
of soluble recombinant EDA in humans are in progress.
There are more than 200 syndromes, including many
of the ectodermal dysplasias, in which tooth agenesis
may be a major feature. Dental agenesis may be associated with other dental anomalies, such as small and short
crowns and roots of the teeth that are present, conical
crowns, enamel hypoplasia, taurodontism, delayed eruption, prolonged retention of primary teeth, infraocclusion
of primary teeth, ectopic eruption, transposition, lack of
alveolar bone, reduced vertical dimensions, increased
overbite, and tooth impaction (particularly palatally displaced canines).117

HYPODONTIA AND PALATALLY DISPLACED
CANINES
Impacted or palatally displaced canines occur in 85% of
cases with a lack of permanent maxillary canine eruption. In the other 15%, the canines are “ectopic” (buccal). Palatally displaced canines are not typically associated with dental crowding. Palatally displaced canines
are frequently, but not always, found in dentitions with
various anomalies. These include small peg-shaped or
missing maxillary lateral incisors, hypodontia involving other teeth, dentition spacing, and dentitions with
delayed development.118 There is greater likelihood of a
palatally displaced canine on the same side of a missing
or small maxillary lateral incisor, emphasizing a local environmental effect.119 There are also cases in which a canine is palatally displaced without an apparent anomaly
of the maxillary lateral incisors, and cases in which there
are missing lateral incisors without palatal displacement
of a canine. Adding to the complexity is the heterogeneity found in studies of cases of both buccally120 and
palatally displaced canines.119 Wherease the canine eruption theory of guidance by the lateral incisor root cannot
explain all instances of palatally displaced canines, it does
seem to play a role in some cases.121
Maxillary canine impaction or displacement is labial/
buccal to the arch in 15% of cases of maxillary canine
impaction and, in contrast to palatal displacement associated with small maxillary teeth,122 is often associated
with dental crowding. Because there are various degrees
of genetic influence on these anomalies, there has been
some discussion about palatally displaced canines themselves also being influenced by genetic factors to some
degree. With apparent genetic and environmental factors
playing various roles in these cases, the etiology appears
to be multifactorial.123 This is supported by the occurrence of palatally displaced canines occurring in a higher
percentage within families than in the general population. Generally, the phenotype is the result of some genetic influences (either or both directly or indirectly, e.g.,

63

through a primary effect on development of some or all
of the rest of the dentition) interacting with environmental factors. Some of these cases may be examples of how
primary genetic influences (which still interact with other
genes and environmental factors) affect a phenotypic expression that is a variation in a local environment, such
as the physical structure of the lateral incisor in relation
to the developing canine.

HYPODONTIA (OLIGODONTIA) AND CANCER
Recently it has been determined that hypodontia may be
an indicator of susceptibility to the development of cancer. A striking example of this was reported in a Finnish
family in which oligodontia and colorectal cancer were
associated with each other and with autosomal-dominant
inheritance. The oligodontia and cancer predisposition
were caused by a nonsense mutation in the AXIN2 gene,
a Wnt-signaling regulator. Colorectal cancer or precancerous lesions in the family were found only in association
with oligodontia and the AXIN2 mutation, and affected
all those of the oldest generation who had the mutation.
A different type of de novo mutation (frameshift) in the
same gene was found in an unrelated young patient with
oligodontia. Both mutations are expected to inactivate
the AXIN2 protein function, leading to an increase in Wnt
signaling, which may lead to cancer development. This
change in AXIN2 protein function also clearly changes
the network signaling involved in dental development.124
Another report found a heterozygous nonsense mutation
in AXIN2 in a three-generation family with autosomaldominant oligodontia variably associated with colon or
gastric polyps, early-onset colorectal and/or breast cancer,
and sparse hair and eyebrows.125
Further support for the proposition that hypodontia
can be developmentally associated with cancer comes
from a University of Kentucky report that women with
epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC) are 8.1 times more likely
to have hypodontia than are women without EOC. In
contrast to the oligodontia reported with the specific mutations in the AXIN2 gene, the severity of hypodontia was
similar between the two groups (affected and nonaffected)
in the Kentucky study, with one or two teeth being agenic. Maxillary lateral incisors followed by second premolars
were the most frequently affected.126 In addition, a similar study from Slovenia found a prevalence of hypodontia
of 19.2% in women with EOC, and 6.7% in women in the
control group (p = 0.004). The most frequently missing
teeth for women with EOC and women in the control
group were the maxillary second premolars and maxillary
lateral incisors, respectively.127 Sequence analysis of the
MSX1, PAX9, AXIN2, EDA, WNT10A, BARX, and BRCA1
genes from the DNA from participants in the University
of Kentucky study led to a conclusion that one half of
the dually affected patients had an independent causation of the two conditions, thus significantly reducing
the previously estimated ovarian cancer risk for women
with congenital tooth agenesis.128 A study of self-reported
family cancer history and analysis of 14 DNA markers in
the AXIN2, FGF3, FGF10, and FGFR2 genes in Brazilian
individuals with dental agenesis showed that individuals with tooth agenesis had an increased risk of having a

64

Chapter 3

n

Acquired and Developmental Disturbances of the Teeth and Associated Oral Structures

family history of cancer (p = 0.00006; OR = 2.7; 95% CI,
1.6-4.4). Tooth agenesis was also associated with variants
in the genes studied. It should be noted that although
the conglomerate self-reported family history of cancer
was significant, a breakdown of types of cancer by “type”
(organ or body location) found only brain and nervous
system, breast, and prostate to be significant for probands
with hypodontia.129 There was a family history of ovarian cancer in one individual with hypodontia and in one
control individual, so there was no significant difference.
Although the small number suggests a question of power
to exclude this or other types, it does indicate that the
risk of ovarian cancer is relatively small if it is associated
with hypodontia. These findings are an example of how
changes in the protein products of genes can have pleiotropic effects on different parts of the body at different
times. Future studies of the family history and genotypes
of individuals with hypodontia will help illustrate the potential relative risk of cancer development in individuals
or family members with hypodontia compared with that
in the general population.

ECTODERMAL DYSPLASIAS
Developmental agenesis of primary teeth is relatively rare.
When several primary teeth fail to develop, other ectodermal deficiencies are usually evident. There are more than
170 types of ectodermal dysplasia with various anomalies of ectodermal derivatives, including both primary
and permanent teeth, hair, nails, and skin. Children with
missing primary and permanent teeth may have some
or all of the signs of a type of ectodermal dysplasia and
should undergo further evaluation.130
One of the more common types of ectodermal dysplasia is X-linked recessive hypohidrotic ectodermal dysplasia (XLHED), also called anhidrotic ectodermal dysplasia
and Christ-Siemens-Touraine syndrome. A rare autosomalrecessive form also occurs that is clinically indistinguishable
from XLHED. Hypodontia and dental hypoplasia, as well
as hypotrichosis, hypohidrosis/anhidrosis, and astea­
tosis, are characteristic of XLHED. Secondary characteristics
include a deficiency in salivary flow, protuberant lips, and
a saddle-nose appearance. The skin is often dry and scaly,
and there is fissuring at the corners of the mouth. As already
noted, mutations in the EDA gene have been found in
most patients with XLHED.131
Because the absence of teeth predisposes the child to a
lack of alveolar process growth, the construction of dentures is complicated. However, as might be expected in at
least most types of ectodermal dysplasia, skeletal structures are normal. Serial lateral cephalograms obtained
during childhood and adolescence have shown that the
sagittal development of the jaw is essentially normal. A
deficiency in sweat glands predisposes to increased body
temperature, and children with hypohidrosis/anhidrosis
are extremely uncomfortable during hot weather. Many
of them must reside in cool climates. Children with ectodermal dysplasia usually have normal mental capacity
and a normal life expectancy. Consanguinity increases
the likelihood of expression of an inherited recessive trait
or condition (Fig. 3-37) and may be one way a female
with a normal karyotype can be affected.

The primary teeth that are present may be normal
or reduced in size. The anterior teeth are often conical,
which is characteristic of oligodontia associated with
many types of ectodermal dysplasia. The primary molars
without permanent successors have a tendency to become ankylosed.
The many types of ectodermal dysplasia with different modes of inheritance can be emphasized by describing a “tooth and nail” type of autosomal-dominant
ectodermal dysplasia, also called Witkop syndrome, reported
by Giansanti and associates.132 This ectodermal dysplasia
is characterized by hypoplastic nails and hypodontia.
An MSX1 gene mutation different from that found
when only hypodontia is present has been reported by
Jumlongras and colleagues in a family with tooth and
nail syndrome.133 In contrast to most nonsyndromic
hypodontias, in which premolars and maxillary lateral
incisors (excluding third molars) are most often missing,
the mandibular incisors, second molars, and maxillary
canines are most frequently absent. Overall, the teeth
are generally not affected to the extent seen in XLHED,
and there is little involvement of the hair and sweat
glands.134
For children with a large number of missing primary
teeth, partial dentures can be constructed at an early age;
2- and 3-year-old children have successfully worn partial
dentures. Their ability to masticate food increases, and
their nutritional status may improve. A partial denture
can be adjusted or remade at intervals to allow for the
eruption of permanent teeth. Denture construction at an
early age may also reduce the psychological problem of
the child’s feeling “different” (Fig. 3-38).
If the permanent teeth erupt in good position and in
favorable relationship to each other, partial dentures may
serve until the child is old enough for implants or a fixed
partial denture (described in Chapter 24). Orthodontic and surgical procedures may be necessary before the
prosthodontic treatment, however.
Bonding techniques have improved clinicians’ ability
to provide aesthetic interim restorations and greater function for patients with conical teeth with or without oligodontia or hypodontia. Nunn and colleagues published
a series of five papers (monthly, beginning in the March
2003 British Dental Journal) that outline the management
of patients with hypodontia by a coordinated interdisciplinary team of dentists and demonstrate the advantages
of this approach.135 Several dental specialties are represented on the team. Ideally, the initial responsibility for
oversight and coordination of the patient’s care begins
in infancy with the services of a pediatric dentist. As the
patient grows and develops through puberty, a general
family practitioner may assume the oversight and coordination responsibilities.
When maxillary lateral incisors are missing, the clinician must analyze the occlusion and arches carefully to
determine whether there is sufficient room within the
arch to maintain space and to provide fixed bridgework.
If space for a normal-sized lateral incisor replacement is
insufficient, the clinician may sometimes choose to move
the canine forward into the lateral position and reshape it
to appear more like a permanent lateral incisor.

Chapter 3

n

Acquired and Developmental Disturbances of the Teeth and Associated Oral Structures

65

C

A

D

B
Figure 3-37 A, Four-year-old girl with many features of ectodermal dysplasia. There was a history of consanguinity. B, The anterior teeth were small and conical. The lack of development of the alveolar process is evident. C, The facial pattern was good,
even though many primary and permanent teeth were missing. D, Partial dentures were constructed, modified, and remade
as additional teeth erupted. The models show how growth has occurred in the mandible and maxilla.

INTRINSIC DISCOLORATION OF TEETH
(PIGMENTATION OF TEETH)
The primary teeth occasionally have unusual pigmentation. Certain conditions arising from the pulp can cause
the entire tooth to appear discolored. Factors causing
these conditions include blood-borne pigment, blood decomposition within the pulp, and drugs used in procedures

such as root canal therapy. (Color changes in relation to
trauma are discussed in Chapter 27.)

DISCOLORATION IN HYPERBILIRUBINEMIA
In several conditions, excess levels of bilirubin are released into the circulating blood.136 If teeth are developing
during periods of hyperbilirubinemia, they may become
intrinsically stained. The two most common disorders

66

Chapter 3

n

Acquired and Developmental Disturbances of the Teeth and Associated Oral Structures

A

C

B

D

Figure 3-38 A, Four-year-old boy with characteristics of ectodermal dysplasia. Many primary and permanent teeth are congenitally missing. The skin is dry, and the hair is sparse. B, The anterior primary teeth are typically conical. C and D, A full
maxillary overdenture and a partial mandibular denture were constructed.

that cause this intrinsic staining are erythroblastosis fetalis and biliary atresia. Other less common causes are premature birth, ABO blood type incompatibility, neonatal
respiratory distress, significant internal hemorrhage, congenital hypothyroidism, biliary hypoplasia, tyrosinemia,
α1-antitrypsin deficiency, and neonatal hepatitis.
Erythroblastosis fetalis results from the transplacental
passage of maternal antibodies against red blood cell antigens of the infant, which leads to an increased rate of red
blood cell destruction.137 Cullen reported on the occurrence of erythroblastosis fetalis produced by Kell immunization.138 In utero, the maternal antibodies coat the fetal red
blood cells and cause hemolysis. The fetus develops anemia,
with a resultant increase in the bilirubin content of the amniotic fluid. The newborn appears pale and anemic. Shortly
after birth, jaundice occurs as a result of the high bilirubin
levels. Despite the development of a method of prevention
of maternal isoimmunization by Rh antigens, it remains a
significant cause of anemia and jaundice in newborn infants. However, an infant from an Rh-negative mother’s first
pregnancy rarely develops this disease.

If an infant has had severe, persistent jaundice during the neonatal period, the primary teeth may have a
characteristic blue-green color, although in a few instances brown teeth have been observed (Fig. 3-39). The
color of the pigmented tooth is gradually reduced. The
fading in color is particularly noticeable in the anterior
teeth.

DISCOLORATION IN PORPHYRIA
The porphyrias are inherited and acquired disorders in
which the activities of the enzymes of the heme biosynthetic pathway are partially or almost completely
deficient.139 As a result, abnormally elevated levels of
porphyrins and/or their precursors are produced, which
accumulate in tissues and are excreted. Congenital erythropoietic porphyria (Günther disease) is a rare autosomalrecessive form of the disease.
Children with congenital erythropoietic porphyria
have red-colored urine, are hypersensitive to light, and
develop subepidermal bullous lesions when their skin is
exposed to sunlight. Their primary teeth are purplish-brown

Chapter 3

n

Acquired and Developmental Disturbances of the Teeth and Associated Oral Structures

Figure 3-39 Characteristic blue-green discoloration of the

primary teeth in an infant who suffered from persistent
jaundice in the neonatal period.

as a result of the deposition of porphyrin in the developing structures. The permanent teeth also show evidence
of intrinsic staining but to a lesser degree.

DISCOLORATION IN CYSTIC FIBROSIS
Cystic fibrosis is an inherited, chronic, multisystem,
life-shortening disorder characterized primarily by
poor digestion and obstruction and infection of the
airways. It is autosomal-recessive and is caused by mutations in both copies of the cystic fibrosis transmembrane regulator gene (CFTR). Zegarelli and colleagues
have suggested that tooth discoloration in persons with
cystic fibrosis is a result of either the disease alone, or
therapeutic agents, especially tetracyclines, or a combination of the two factors.140 The possibility that there
is, at least in part, an intrinsic developmental enamel
abnormality secondary to the disease is supported by
the investigations of Wright and associates, who found
abnormal enamel in the incisors of homozygous CFTR
knockout mice.141 Further studies by Arquitt and colleagues also strongly suggest that CFTR plays an important role in enamel formation.142
Although many patients with cystic fibrosis who
lived during the latter half of the twentieth century
endured unsightly discolorations of their teeth because they received tetracycline therapy during a period when their tooth crowns were forming, modern
physicians rarely, if ever, prescribe tetracyclines for patients during their tooth-forming years. During the era
when tetracycline therapy for children was common,
Primosch reported on tetracycline tooth discolorations,
enamel defects, and dental caries in 86 young patients
with cystic fibrosis.143 The incidence of dental caries in
these patients was compared with that in control individuals matched for gender, race, exposure to optimally
fluoridated water, chronologic age, and dental age. The
findings indicated a high prevalence of tooth discolorations and enamel defects but a significantly reduced
caries experience in the patients with cystic fibrosis
who had received tetracycline drugs.

67

Figure 3-40 Pigmentation in tetracycline therapy. The per-

manent incisors that have erupted appear yellowish-brown.

DISCOLORATION IN TETRACYCLINE THERAPY
Dentists and physicians have observed that children who
received tetracycline therapy during the period of calcification of the primary or permanent teeth show a degree
of pigmentation of the clinical crowns of the teeth. As
van der Bijl and Pitigoi-Aron pointed out, because the
tetracyclines chelate calcium salts, the drugs are incorporated into bones and teeth during calcification.144 The
crowns of affected teeth are discolored, ranging from yellow to brown and from gray to black (Fig. 3-40). At present most, if not all, infections in children can be treated
effectively with antibiotics that do not cause tooth discoloration. Consequently, this previously common problem
is now rare.
Tetracycline is deposited in the dentin and, to a lesser
extent, in the enamel of teeth that are calcifying during
the time the drug is administered. The location of the
pigment in the tooth can be correlated with the stage of
development of the tooth and the time and duration of
drug administration. The tetracyclines, which are yellow,
fluoresce under ultraviolet light. When tetracyclines in
the dental structures darken from yellow to brown, the
fluorescence diminishes because of the destruction of the
fluorophores.
The exposure of the teeth to light results in slow oxidation, with a change in color of the pigment from yellow
to brown. The larger the dose of drug relative to body
weight, the deeper the pigmentation. The duration of exposure to the drug may be less important than the total
dose relative to body weight.
Because tetracyclines can be transferred through the
placenta, the crowns of the primary teeth may also show
noticeable discoloration if tetracyclines are administered
during pregnancy. Moffitt and colleagues have observed
that the critical period for tetracycline-related discoloration in the primary dentition is 4 months in utero to 3
months postpartum for maxillary and mandibular incisors and 5 months in utero to 9 months postpartum for
maxillary and mandibular canines.145
The sensitive period for tetracycline-induced discoloration in the permanent maxillary and mandibular

68

Chapter 3

n

Acquired and Developmental Disturbances of the Teeth and Associated Oral Structures

A

B

Figure 3-41 A, Tetracycline-pigmented teeth. B, The maxillary incisors have been bleached; the lower mandibular incisors are

untreated.

incisors and canines is approximately 3 months to
7 years of age. The maxillary lateral incisors are an exception because they begin to calcify at 10 to 12 months
postpartum.
In addition to fluoride and tetracyclines (including minocycline), ciprofloxacin has been associated with intrinsic staining. Medications that have been reported to cause
extrinsic staining include chlorhexidine, oral iron salts,
co-amoxiclav, and essential oils.146

BLEACHING OF INTRINSIC TOOTH
DISCOLORATION
Vital bleaching of intrinsically discolored teeth became a
popular dental cosmetic procedure during the late twentieth century (Fig. 3-41), and several safe techniques are
available. The accepted procedures incorporate the use of
a peroxide compound placed on the tooth surface that
bleaches the intrinsic tooth pigments to a lighter hue.
Adding energy to the peroxide compound, as in the form
of heat, light, or laser radiation, may accelerate this
process.
Although many diluted tooth-bleaching products are
available over the counter, the most efficient and effective systems are provided or prescribed by a dentist. To be
safe, bleaching procedures must be carefully performed
and monitored. Although these procedures are usually
performed on permanent teeth, Brantley and associates
reported successfully bleaching discolored primary teeth
in a 4-year-old girl.147
Refer to current textbooks on endodontics or cosmetic
dentistry for more information on bleaching techniques.
Another valuable resource with considerable detailed
information is the Special Supplement of the Journal of
the American Dental Association, volume 128, April 1997.
This supplement provides reports presented by numerous recognized bleaching experts during an international
symposium on the subject of nonrestorative treatment of
discolored teeth.
If the tooth discoloration is severe and bleaching does
not adequately improve the condition, the dentist may
consider masking the visible surfaces with bonded veneer restorations similar to those discussed in Chapter
11. Bleaching and enamel microabrasion may be used in

combination for certain types of discoloration, and these
procedures may also be used as adjunctive steps before
placement of veneer restorations.

MICROGNATHIA
Micrognathia is usually congenital, but it may be acquired
in later life. The mandible is most often affected (Fig.
3-42). The etiology of congenital micrognathia appears
to be heterogeneous. Deficient nutrition of the mother
and intrauterine injury resulting from pressure or trauma have been suggested as possible causes. In addition,
micrognathia may be part of the Robin sequence, which
also includes cleft palate (especially in the posterior with
a rounded distal edge) and glossoptosis. Although this
developmental sequence may be sporadic, it is often the
pleiotropic expression of a gene for a condition such as
Stickler syndrome or velocardiofacial syndrome and warrants a clinical genetic evaluation.148,149
Infants with mandibular micrognathia have difficulty
breathing and experience episodes of cyanosis; they must
be kept in a ventral position as much as possible. The anterior portion of the mandible is positioned so that the
tongue has little if any support and can fall backward,
causing an obstruction.
Based on longitudinal growth studies, Pruzansky and
Richmond reported that, in most instances of congenital micrognathia, the increment in mandibular growth
relative to total facial growth during infancy and early
childhood is sufficient to overcome the extreme recessiveness of the chin at birth.150 This is often referred to
as “catch-up growth.” Daskalogiannakis and colleagues
performed 29 cephalometric measurements, taken
at three different ages, on 96 patients with Robin sequence and compared them with similar measurements
in 50 patients with isolated clefting of the palate (control group).151 They found that patients with Robin sequence had mandibles significantly smaller than those
in the control group from approximately 5.5 years of
age to 17 years of age. This finding suggests that the
mandibles of patients with Robin sequence do not really grow proportionately more than those in others
not affected by the disorder.

Chapter 3

n

Acquired and Developmental Disturbances of the Teeth and Associated Oral Structures

A

69

The nursing bottle may be used in the treatment of congenital micrognathia to help promote adequate function of
the mandible. Because the infant should be made to reach
for the nipple of the nursing bottle, the bottle should never
be allowed to rest against the mandible. The parent is instructed to sit the infant on his or her lap in an upright position and place gentle forward pressure on the child’s ramus
with the thumb and fingers while offering the bottle. Thus
the infant must extend the mandible to feed. Mandibular
advancement by orthopedic force is sometimes recommended, as well as surgical mandibular reconstruction.
Hotz and Gnoinski have described the use of a special palatal obturator appliance to help infants born with
Robin sequence.152 In addition to providing coverage to
seal the cleft palate, the appliance includes a posterior
extension to simulate the missing soft palate structures,
including the uvula. The appliance seems to stimulate the
infant to maintain a more normal tongue position. The
improved tongue position significantly reduces the tendency for the infant to experience life-threatening apneic
episodes. Dean and colleagues also reported successful use
of similar appliances in infants with Robin sequence,153
including 22 infants with severe airway obstruction. Their
results supported the use of the obturator, but they also
concluded that further study of treatment with these appliances was needed.
Acquired micrognathia may develop gradually and
may not be evident until children reach 4 to 6 years of
age. This anomaly in growth is usually related to heredity.
Ankylosis of the jaw caused by a birth injury or trauma in
later life may result in an acquired type of micrognathia.
Infection in the temporomandibular joint area can also
cause arrested growth at the head of the condyle and lead
to development of the acquired pattern of micrognathia.
In cases of true ankylosis of the mandible, arthroplasty
should be recommended.

ANOMALIES OF THE TONGUE

B
Figure 3-42 A, Micrognathia in a girl 1 month of age. The

chin is noticeably recessive. B, The radiograph shows the
extent of the development of the dentition at birth. When
the patient was 1 year of age, the micrognathia was less
noticeable.

Pediatric patients with unremarkable medical histories
rarely complain of symptomatic tongue lesions. However, the tongue should be inspected carefully during the
examination. Several benign conditions may be evident
that should be brought to the attention of the parents.
Burket described four main types of papillae of the
tongue.154 From 10 to 15 large circumvallate papillae may
be found on the posterior border of the dorsum. These
papillae have a blood supply and are the site of numerous
taste buds. Fungiform (mushroom-shaped) papillae may
be distributed over the entire dorsum of the tongue; however, they are present in greater numbers at the tip and toward the lateral margins of the tongue. Inflammatory and
atrophic changes occurring on the dorsum of the tongue
may involve the vascularized fungiform papillae. The
most numerous papillae of the tongue are the filiform papillae, which are thin and hairlike, and evenly distributed
over the dorsal surface. The filiform papillae are without a
vascular core, and their continuous growth is slight. The
foliate papillae represent a fourth type and are arranged
in folds along the lateral margins of the tongue; the taste
sensation is associated with these papillae.

70

Chapter 3

n

Acquired and Developmental Disturbances of the Teeth and Associated Oral Structures

one of the studies 47% of those affected had no family
history of ankyloglossia.156,157 Familial cleft palate with
or without ankyloglossia is caused by mutation in the
TBX22 gene.158
Ayers and Hilton reported a case of ankyloglossia in
a 7-year-old boy who had been evaluated at his school
for a speech problem.159 The patient had previously
undergone routine dental examinations, but no treatment had been suggested by the dentist. Tongue mobility and speech patterns improved greatly after the
frenum attachment was released surgically. The patient
and parents reported very little postoperative discomfort. This history and the results are similar to those
of the 6-year-old girl with ankyloglossia illustrated in
Fig. 3-44. Messner and Lalakea, after studying 30 oneto 12-year-old children with ankyloglossia, concluded
that tongue mobility and speech improved significantly after frenuloplasty.160

MACROGLOSSIA
Macroglossia refers to a larger-than-normal tongue size
and may be either congenital or acquired. Congenital
macroglossia, which is caused by an overdevelopment of
the lingual musculature or vascular tissues, becomes increasingly apparent as the child develops.
An abnormally large tongue is characteristic of hypothyroidism, in which case the tongue is fissured and
may extend from the mouth. Macroglossia is also commonly observed with type 2 glycogen-storage disease,
neurofibromatosis type 1, and Beckwith-Wiedemann
syndrome. It can be an isolated and sporadic (nonfamilial) trait or a familial (autosomal-dominant) trait, as
studied by Reynoso and colleagues.155 Macroglossia has
also been cited as a characteristic of Down syndrome.
Occasionally an allergic reaction causes a transitory enlargement of the tongue (angioneurotic edema). Both
allergic reaction and injury can cause such severe enlargement of the tongue that a tracheotomy is necessary to maintain a patent airway.
A disproportionately large tongue may cause both an
abnormal growth pattern of the jaw and malocclusion.
Flaring of the lower anterior teeth and an Angle Class III
malocclusion are occasionally the result of macroglossia.
The treatment of macroglossia depends on its cause and
severity. Surgical reduction of a portion of the tongue is
occasionally necessary.

ANKYLOGLOSSIA (TONGUE-TIE)
In ankyloglossia a short lingual frenum extending from
the tip of the tongue to the floor of the mouth and
onto the lingual gingival tissue limits movements of
the tongue and causes speech difficulties (Fig. 3-43).
Stripping of the lingual tissues may occur if the tonguetie is not corrected. Surgical reduction of the abnormal
lingual frenum is indicated if it interferes with the infant’s nursing (lingual frenectomy, frenotomy, or frenuloplasty). In the older child, a reduction of the frenum should be recommended only if local conditions
or speech problems warrant the treatment. Studies of
nonsyndromic ankyloglossia have suggested both autosomal-dominant and X-linked inheritance, although in

A

A

B

C

D

Figure 3-44 A, Ankyloglossia in a 6-year-old girl. B, Patient

had limited tongue mobility and speech problems. C, Two
weeks after surgical release. D, Tongue mobility and speech
improved spontaneously.

B

Figure 3-43 A, Ankyloglossia (tongue-tie). A short, heavy lingual frenum extends from the top of the tongue to the floor of

the mouth and onto the lingual tissue. B, A mirror view of the abnormal frenum.

Chapter 3

n

Acquired and Developmental Disturbances of the Teeth and Associated Oral Structures

FISSURED TONGUE AND GEOGRAPHIC TONGUE
(BENIGN MIGRATORY GLOSSITIS)
A fissured tongue is seen in a small number of children
and may be of no clinical significance, although it is
sometimes associated with hypothyroidism and Down
syndrome. The fissures on the dorsum of the tongue usually have a symmetric pattern and may be longitudinal or
at right angles to the margin of the tongue. Vitamin B–
complex deficiency may be associated with the fissuring.
Treatment of the fissured tongue is generally unnecessary
unless a mild inflammation develops at the base of the
fissures from an accumulation of food debris. Brushing of
the tongue and improved oral hygiene aid in reducing the
inflammation and soreness.
A wandering type of lesion and probably the most
common tongue anomaly is known as geographic tongue.
Prevalence rates from 1% to as high as 14% have been
reported. Kullaa-Mikkonen studied the inheritance of fissured tongue in 31 families and concluded that fissured
tongue with smooth-surfaced papillae is transmitted as
an autosomal-dominant trait with incomplete penetrance
and is preceded by geographic tongue.161 The severity of
fissured tongue increased with age. Tongue fissuring with
normal-appearing filiform papillae was found not to be
familial and was not associated with geographic tongue.
Geographic tongue is often detected during routine dental examination of pediatric patients who are unaware of
the condition. Red, smooth areas devoid of filiform papillae
appear on the dorsum of the tongue. The margins of the

A

71

lesions are well developed and slightly raised. The involved
areas enlarge and migrate by extension of the desquamation of the papillae at one margin of the lesion and regeneration at the other (Fig. 3-45). Every few days, a change
can be noted in the pattern of the lesions. The condition is
self-limiting, however, and no treatment is necessary.
Bánóczy and colleagues have indicated that gastrointestinal disturbances associated with anemia may be related to migratory glossitis.162 In addition, a psychosomatic
disorder should be considered as a possible etiologic factor. Histologically the process appears to be superficial,
with desquamation of the keratin layers of papillae and
inflammation of the corium.

COATED TONGUE
A white coating of the tongue is usually associated with
local factors. The amount of coating on the tongue varies
with the time of day and is related to oral hygiene and the
character of the diet. The coating consists of food debris,
microorganisms, and keratinized epithelium found on
and around the filiform papillae (Fig. 3-46).
Children who have a congenital or acquired deficiency in salivary flow may have a coated tongue, occasionally to the extent that a dry crust appears on the
dorsum of the tongue. Frequent rinsing with artificial
saliva palliates the condition. Systemic disease with associated fever and dehydration may also cause a coating, which is usually white but may become stained
with foods or drugs. Increased ingestion of liquid is
appropriate to alleviate this situation. Brushing the

B

C
Figure 3-45 A, Geographic tongue. The smooth areas are devoid of filiform papillae. B, The pattern observed at the initial visit
is indistinguishable 4 weeks later. C, In 1 year a new pattern is developing on the dorsum of the tongue.

72

Chapter 3

n

Acquired and Developmental Disturbances of the Teeth and Associated Oral Structures

Figure 3-46 White coating of the tongue is usually associ-

ated with local factors.

tongue with a toothbrush and dentifrice reduces the
coating.

WHITE STRAWBERRY TONGUE
An enlargement of the fungiform papillae extending
above the level of the white desquamating filiform papillae gives the appearance of an unripe strawberry. The
condition has been observed in cases of scarlet fever and
Kawasaki disease in young children. During the course of
scarlet fever and other acute febrile conditions, the coating disappears and the enlarged red papillae extend above
a smooth, denuded surface, which gives the appearance
of a red strawberry or raspberry. The tongue returns to
normal after recovery from the systemic condition.

BLACK HAIRY TONGUE
Black hairy tongue is rarely seen in children but occurs
in young adults and has been related to the oral and
systemic intake of antibiotics, smoking, and excessive
ingestion of dark drinks such as coffee and tea (Fig. 3-47).
Accumulations of keratin on the filiform papillae in the
middle third of the tongue become elongated into hairlike
processes, sometimes as long as 2.5 cm (1 inch). Neville
and colleagues note that the cause is uncertain but that
an apparent increase in keratin production or a decrease
in normal keratin desquamation results.136 It is a benign
condition with no serious sequelae. Rigorous hygienic
procedures such as brushing and scraping the tongue may
help control it. When the condition appears during antibiotic therapy, it usually disappears again without specific
treatment after the antibiotics are discontinued.

INDENTATION OF THE TONGUE MARGIN
(CRENATION)
During the examination of the pediatric patient, the dentist may notice a scalloping or crenation along the lingual
periphery. Careful examination will reveal the markings
to be caused by the tongue’s position against the lingual
surfaces of the mandibular teeth. Although usually no significance can be attached to these crenations, they have

Figure 3-47 Black hairy tongue. This condition usually has

no clinical significance.

been related to pressure habits, macroglossia, vitamin
B–complex deficiency, and systemic disease that causes
reduced muscle tone.

MEDIAN RHOMBOID GLOSSITIS (CENTRAL
PAPILLARY ATROPHY OF THE TONGUE)
Median rhomboid glossitis is an oval, rhomboid, or diamond-shaped reddish patch on the dorsal surface of the
tongue immediately anterior to the circumvallate papillae.
Flat, slightly raised, or nodular, it stands out distinctly from
the rest of the tongue because it has no filiform papillae.
This atrophic area is usually asymptomatic. Long believed
to be a developmental anomaly, the condition is now recognized almost exclusively to represent a chronic, localized,
and mild candidal infection, as proposed by Cooke.163
Although median rhomboid glossitis occurs more often in adults, it is sometimes seen in teenagers and even
occurs infrequently in younger children. Barasch and
colleagues have observed it with high prevalence in HIVpositive children.164 Treatment with topical antifungal
agents is appropriate.

TRAUMA TO THE TONGUE, WITH EMPHASIS
ON TONGUE PIERCING
A child may bite his or her tongue as a result of a traumatic
blow or fall. The dentist may inadvertently traumatize the
tongue with a cutting instrument during operative procedures. Deep laceration of the tongue requires suturing
to minimize scarring and to aid in hemorrhage control.
In cases of severe injury, the tongue should be examined
carefully for the detection of any enlargement that might
interfere with the maintenance of an open airway.
Tongue piercing, a deliberate trauma, is one of the
popular types of body piercing occurring in all parts of
the world today, especially among teenagers and young
adults (Fig. 3-48). Tongue piercing is of particular interest

Chapter 3

n

Acquired and Developmental Disturbances of the Teeth and Associated Oral Structures

Figure 3-48 Tongue ornaments are popular among teenag-

ers and young adults.

in dentistry because it carries a high risk of adverse intraoral sequelae and can have significant systemic effects. The
scientific literature has exploded with documented cases
of complications following piercing procedures. Fractured
teeth, dental abrasion, and gingival recession are reported
to be common sequelae. Other observed complications
with life-threatening potential include brain abscess,165
cephalic tetanus,166 endocarditis,167 Ludwig angina,168
and upper airway compromise.169 Whenever appropriate,
dentists should counsel their patients and other members
of the community about the serious risks associated with
this form of body art. If patients insist on wearing tongue
ornaments and other body jewelry, they should be advised to remove them at least during athletic activities in
which the risk of injury is high.

ABNORMAL LABIAL FRENUM
A maxillary midline diastema is frequently seen in preschool children and in those in the mixed-dentition
stage. It is important to determine whether the diastema
is normal for that particular time of development or is
related to an abnormal maxillary labial frenum.
A midline diastema may be considered normal for
many children during the time of eruption of the permanent maxillary central incisors. When the incisors first
erupt, they may be separated by bone, and the crowns
incline distally because of the crowding of the roots. With
the eruption of the lateral incisors and the permanent canines, the midline diastema is reduced, and in most cases
normal contact between the central incisors develops.
Insufficient tooth mass in the maxillary anterior region, the presence of peg-shaped lateral incisors, or the
congenital absence of lateral incisors may cause a diastema. Other factors and anomalies, including a midline
supernumerary tooth, an oral habit, macroglossia, and
abnormally large mandibular anterior teeth, should be
considered as possible causes (in addition to an abnormal
labial frenum) of the midline diastema.
The labial frenum is composed of two layers of epithelium enclosing a loose vascular connective tissue. Muscle
fibers, if present, are derived from the orbicularis oris
muscle.

73

Figure 3-49 Abnormal labial frenum. There is blanching of

the free marginal tissue between the central incisors and of
the palatine papilla. A frenectomy is indicated.
The origin of the maxillary frenum is at the midline
on the inner surface of the lip. The origin is often wide,
but the tissue of the frenum itself narrows in width and is
inserted in the midline into the outer layer of periosteum
and into the connective tissue of the internal maxillary
suture and the alveolar process. The exact attachment site
is variable. It can be several millimeters above the crest of
the ridge or on the ridge, or the fibers may pass between
the central incisors and attach to the palatine papilla.
Many dentists delay considering an abnormal labial frenum as the cause of a diastema until all the maxillary permanent anterior teeth, including the canines, have erupted.
This approach may be considered generally correct. However, other diagnostic points should be kept in mind.
One can carry out a simple diagnostic test for an abnormal frenum during mid- to late-mixed dentition by
observing the location of the alveolar attachment when
intermittent pressure is exerted on the frenum. If a heavy
band of tissue with a broad, fanlike base is attached to the
palatine papilla and produces blanching of the papilla, it
is safe to predict that the frenum will unfavorably influence the development of the anterior occlusion (Fig. 3-49).
The abnormal labial frenum, in addition to causing a
midline diastema, can produce other undesirable clinical
conditions. The heavy band of tissue and low attachment
can interfere with toothbrushing by making it difficult
to place the brush at the proper level in the vestibule to
brush in the conventional manner. If fibers of the frenum
attach to the free marginal tissue, stretching of the lip
during mastication and speech may cause stripping of the
tissue from the neck of the tooth. Such attachment may
also cause the accumulation of food particles and eventual pocket formation. The abnormal frenum may restrict
movements of the lip, may interfere with speech, and
may produce an undesirable cosmetic result (Fig. 3-50).

FRENECTOMY
The decision regarding treatment of the labial frenum
should be made only after a careful evaluation to determine whether the result will be undesirable if the condition is allowed to remain.

74

Chapter 3

n

Acquired and Developmental Disturbances of the Teeth and Associated Oral Structures

A

B

C
Figure 3-50 A, Abnormal labial frenum in an 8-year-old child. The heavy, fan-shaped band of tissue interfered with speech

and had an undesirable appearance. B, An oblique view of the abnormal frenum. C, A much more desirable appearance is
observed 6 months after the frenectomy.

In the surgical technique, a wedge-shaped section
of tissue is removed, including the tissue between the
central incisors and the tissue extending palatally to
the nasal palatine papilla (Figs. 3-50 and 3-51). Lateral
incisions are made on either side of the frenum to the
depth of the underlying bone. The free marginal tissue
on the mesial side of the central incisors should not be

disturbed. The wedge of tissue can be picked up with
tissue forceps and excised with tissue shears at an area
close enough to the origin of the frenum to provide a
desirable cosmetic effect. Sutures are placed inside the
lip to approximate the free tissue margins. It is generally unnecessary to suture or pack the tissue between
the incisors.

Chapter 3

n

Acquired and Developmental Disturbances of the Teeth and Associated Oral Structures

A

B

C

D

E

REFERENCES
1.	US Department of Health and Human Services. Oral health in
America: a report of the Surgeon General. Rockville, Md, US
Department of Health and Human Services, National Institute of Dental and Craniofacial Research, National Institutes
of Health, 2000.
2.	Molinari JA: Microbial disease trends and acquired antibiotic
resistance: Part 1, Compend Contin Educ Dent 18(2):106–108,
1997.
3.	Bader G: Odontomatosis (multiple odontomas), Oral Surg
Oral Med Oral Pathol 23(6):770–773, 1967.
4.	Nanni L, et al.: SHH mutation is associated with solitary median maxillary central incisor: a study of 13 patients and review of the literature, Am J Med Genet 102(1):1–10, 2001.

75

Figure 3-51 A, Abnormal labial frenum observed in a preschool child is causing a diastema between the primary
central incisors and is interfering with normal movement
of the upper lip. B, A wedge-shaped section of tissue,
including the frenum, has been removed. C, Two sutures
have been placed to approximate the tissue margins.
D, The permanent incisors have erupted. No reattachment
of the frenum fibers has occurred. E, A desirable result
of the frenectomy is evident 5 years after the surgical
procedure.

5.	Grahnen H, Lindahl B, Omnell KA: Dens invaginatus. I.
A clinical, roentgenological and genetical study of permanent upper lateral incisors, Odont Rev 10:115–137, 1959.
6.	Armitage GC: Development of a classification system for perio­
dontal diseases and conditions, Ann Periodontol 4:1–6, 1999.
7.	Hart TC, Hart PS, Michalec MD, Zhang Y, Firatli E, Van
Dyke TE, Stabholz A, Zlotogorski A, Shapira L, Soskolne
WA: Haim-Munk syndrome and Papillon-Lefèvre syndrome
are allelic mutations in cathepsin, C J Med Genet 37:88–94,
2000. Erratum: J Med Genet 38:79, 2001.
8.	Hewitt C, McCormick D, Linden G, Turk D, Stern I, Wallace
I, Southern L, Zhang L, Howard R, Bullon P, Wong M, Widmer R, et al.: The role of cathepsin C in Papillon-Lefèvre
syndrome, prepubertal periodontitis, and aggressive perio­
dontitis, Hum Mutat 23:222–228, 2004.

76

Chapter 3

n

Acquired and Developmental Disturbances of the Teeth and Associated Oral Structures

9.	Hu CC, et al.: A clinical and research protocol for characterizing patients with hypophosphatasia, Pediatr Dent
18(1):17–23, 1996.
10.	Scriver CR, Cameron D: Pseudohypophosphatasia, N Engl
J Med 281(11):604–606, 1969.
11.	Kalantar Motamedi MH: Treatment of cherubism with locally aggressive behavior presenting in adulthood: report of
four cases and a proposed new grading system, J Oral Maxillofac Surg 56(11):1336–1342, 1998.
12.	Parkin B, Law C: Axenfeld anomaly and retinal changes in
Ramon syndrome: follow-up of two sibs, Am J Med Genet
104:131–134, 2001.
13.	Ueki Y, et al.: Mutations in the gene encoding c-Abl-binding
protein SH3BP2 cause cherubism, Nat Genet 28(2):125–126,
2001.
14.	McDonald RE, Shafer WG: Disseminated juvenile fibrous
dysplasia of the jaws, Am J Dis Child 89(3):354–358, 1955.
15.	Pierce AM, et al.: Fifteen-year follow-up of a family with inherited craniofacial fibrous dysplasia, J Oral Maxillofac Surg
54(6):780–788, 1996.
16.	Von Wowern N: Cherubism: a 36-year long-term followup of 2 generations in different families and review of the
literature, Oral Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol Oral Radiol Endod
90(6):765–772, 2002.
17.	Weinstein M, Bernstein S: Pink ladies: mercury poisoning
in twin girls, CMAJ 168(2):201, 2003.
18.	Horowitz Y, et al.: Acrodynia: a case report of two siblings,
Arch Dis Child 86(6):453, 2002.
19.	Hartsfield JK Jr: Premature exfoliation of teeth in childhood
and adolescence, Adv Pediatr 41:453–470, 1994.
20.	Francis F, Hennig S, Korn B, et al.: A gene (PEX) with homologies to endopeptidases is mutated in patients with Xlinked hypophosphatemic rickets. The HYP Consortium,
Nat Genet 11(2):130–136, 1995.
21.	McWhorter AG, Seale NS: Prevalence of dental abscess in
a population of children with vitamin D-resistant rickets,
Pediatr Dent 13(2):91–96, 1991.
22.	Shroff DV, McWhorter AG, Seale NS: Evaluation of aggressive pulp therapy in a population of vitamin D-resistant
rickets patients: a follow-up of 4 cases, Pediatr Dent
24(4):347–349, 2002.
23.	Rakocz M, Keating J 3rd, Johnson R: Management of the
primary dentition in vitamin D-resistant rickets, Oral Surg
Oral Med Oral Pathol 54(2):166–171, 1982.
24.	Morley AA, Carew JP, Baikie AG: Familial cyclical neutropenia, Br J Haematol 13:719–738, 1967.
25.	Horwitz M, et al.: Mutations in ELA2, encoding neutrophil
elastase, define a 21-day biological clock in cyclic haematopoiesis, Nat Genet 23(4):433–436, 1999.
26.	da Fonseca MA, Fontes F: Early tooth loss due to cyclic neutropenia: long-term follow-up of one patient, Spec Care Dentist 20(5):187–190, 2000.
27.	Seow WK, et al.: Mineral deficiency in the pathogenesis of
enamel hypoplasia in prematurely born, very low birthweight children, Pediatr Dent 11(4):297–302, 1989.
28.	Slayton RL, et al.: Prevalence of enamel hypoplasia and
isolated opacities in the primary dentition, Pediatr Dent
23(1):32–36, 2001.
29.	Sarnat BG, Schour I: Enamel hypoplasia (chronological
enamel aplasia) in relation to systemic disease: a chronologic, morphologic and etiologic classification, J Am Dent
Assoc 29:67–75, 1942.
30.	Sheldon M, Bibby BG, Bales MS: Relationship between
microscopic enamel defects and infantile disabilities, J Dent
Res 24:109–116, 1945.
31.	Purvis RJ, et al.: Enamel hypoplasia of the teeth associated
with neonatal tetany: a manifestation of maternal vitaminD deficiency, Lancet 2(7833):811–814, 1973.

32.	Herman SC, McDonald RE: Enamel hypoplasia in cerebral
palsied children, J Dent Child 30:46–49, 1963.
33.	Cohen HJ, Diner H: The significance of developmental
dental enamel defects in neurological diagnosis, Pediatrics
46(5):737–747, 1970.
34.	Martínez A, et al.: Prevalence of developmental enamel
defects in mentally retarded children, ASDC J Dent Child
69(2):151–155, 2002.
35.	Oliver WJ, et al.: Hypoplastic enamel associated with the
nephrotic syndrome, Pediatrics 32:399–406, 1963.
36.	Koch MJ, et al.: Enamel hypoplasia of primary teeth in
chronic renal failure, Pediatr Nephrol 13(1):68–72, 1999.
37.	Rattner LJ, Myers HM: Occurrence of enamel hypoplasia in
children with congenital allergies, J Dent Res 41:646–649,
1962.
38.	Lawson BF, et al.: The incidence of enamel hypoplasia associated with chronic pediatric lead poisoning, S C Dent
J 29(11):5–10, 1971.
39.	Pearl M, Roland NM: Delayed primary dentition in a case
of congenital lead poisoning, ASDC J Dent Child 47(4):
269–271, 1980.
40.	Turner JG: Two cases of hypoplasia of enamel, Br J Dent Sci
55:227–228, 1912.
41.	Bauer WH: Effect of periapical processes of deciduous teeth on
the buds of permanent teeth, Am J Orthod 32:232–241, 1946.
42.	Mink JR: Relationship of enamel hypoplasia and trauma in
repaired cleft lip and palate. Indiana School of Dentistry,
Indiana­polis, 1961, Indiana University.
43.	Vichi M, Franchi L: Abnormalities of the maxillary incisors in children with cleft lip and palate, ASDC J Dent Child
62(6):412–417, 1995.
44.	Kaste SC, et al.: Dental abnormalities in children treated for
acute lymphoblastic leukemia, Leukemia 11(6):792–796, 1997.
45.	Maguire A, Welbury RR: Long-term effects of antineoplastic
chemotherapy and radiotherapy on dental development,
Dent Update 23(5):188–194, 1996.
46.	Musselman RJ: Dental defects and rubella embryopathy: a clinical study of fifty children, Indianapolis, 1968, Indiana School
of Dentistry. Indiana University.
47.	Willmott NS, Bryan RAE, Duggal MS: Molar-incisorhypomineralisation: a literature review, Eur Arch Paediatr Dent
9(4):172–179, 2008.
48.	Levy SM, et al.: Primary tooth fluorosis and fluoride intake
during the first year of life, Commun Dent Oral Epidemiol
30(4):286–295, 2002.
49.	Everett ET, et al.: Dental fluorosis: variability among different inbred mouse strains, J Dent Res 81(11):794–798,
2002.
50.	McCloskey RJ: A technique for removal of fluorosis stains,
J Am Dent Assoc 109(1):63–64, 1984.
51.	Croll TP: Enamel microabrasion: observations after 10
years, J Am Dent Assoc 128(Suppl):45–50, 1997.
52.	Croll TP, Helpin ML: Enamel microabrasion: a new approach, J Esthet Dent 12(2):64–71, 2000.
53.	Muhler JC: Effect of apical inflammation of the primary
teeth on dental caries in the permanent teeth, J Dent Child
24:209–210, 1957.
54.	Mueller BH, et al.: “Caries-like” resorption of unerupted
permanent teeth, J Pedod 4(2):166–172, 1980.
55.	Holan G, Eidelman E, Mass E: Pre-eruptive coronal resorption of permanent teeth: report of three cases and their
treatments, Pediatr Dent 16(5):373–377, 1994.
56.	Seow WK, Wan A, McAllan LH: The prevalence of pre-eruptive dentin radiolucencies in the permanent dentition,
Pediatr Dent 21(1):26–33, 1999.
57.	Seow WK, Lu PC, McAllan LH: Prevalence of pre-eruptive
intracoronal dentin defects from panoramic radiographs,
Pediatr Dent 21(6):332–339, 1999.

Chapter 3

n

Acquired and Developmental Disturbances of the Teeth and Associated Oral Structures

58.	Lysell L: Taurodontism: a case report and a survey of the
literature, Odontol Rev 13(2):158–174, 1962.
59.	Jaspers MT, Witkop CJ Jr: Taurodontism, an isolated trait
associated with syndromes and X-chromosomal aneuploidy, Am J Hum Genet 32(3):396–413, 1980.
60.	Mena CA: Taurodontism, Oral Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol
32(5):812–823, 1971.
61.	Gedik R, Cimen M: Multiple taurodontism: report of case,
ASDC J Dent Child 67(3):216–217, 2000.
62.	Bixler D, Conneally PM, Christen AG: Dentinogenesis imperfecta: genetic variations in a six-generation family,
J Dent Res 48(6):1196–1199, 1969.
63.	Witkop CJ Jr: Genetics and dental health, New York, 1961,
McGraw-Hill.
64.	Witkop CJ Jr: Manifestations of genetic diseases in the human pulp, Oral Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol 32(2):278–316,
1971.
65.	Shields ED, Bixler D, el-Kafrawy AM: A proposed classification for heritable human dentine defects with a description
of a new entity, Arch Oral Biol 18(4):543–553, 1973.
66.	Zhang X, et al.: DSPP mutation in dentinogenesis imperfecta Shields type II, Nat Genet 27(2):151–152, 2001.
67.	Xiao S, et al.: Dentinogenesis imperfecta 1 with or without
progressive hearing loss is associated with distinct mutations in DSPP, Nat Genet 27(2):201–204, 2001.
68.	Sreenath T, et al.: Dentin sialophosphoprotein knockout
mouse teeth display widened predentin zone and develop
defective dentin mineralization similar to human dentinogenesis imperfecta type III, J Biol Chem 278(27):24874–24880,
2003.
69.	Malmgren B, et al.: Clinical, histopathologic, and genetic
investigation in two large families with dentinogenesis imperfecta type II, Hum Genet 114(5):491–498, 2004.
70.	Bloch-Zupan A, Jamet X, Etard C, et al.: Homozygosity
mapping and candidate prioritization identify mutations,
missed by whole-exome sequencing, in SMOC2, causing major dental developmental defects, Am J Hum Genet
89:773–781, 2011.
71.	Dean JA, et al.: Dentin dysplasia, type II linkage to chromosome 4q, J Craniofac Genet Dev Biol 17(4):172–177,
1997.
72.	Rajpar MH, et al.: Mutation of the signal peptide region of
the bicistronic gene DSPP affects translocation to the endoplasmic reticulum and results in defective dentine biomineralization, Hum Mol Genet 11(21):2559–2565, 2002.
73.	McKnight DA, et al.: A comprehensive analysis of normal
variation and disease-causing mutations in the human
DSPP gene, Hum Mutat 29(12):1392–1404, 2008.
74.	Beattie ML, et al.: Phenotypic variation in dentinogenesis imperfecta/dentin dysplasia linked to 4q21, J Dent Res
85(4):329–333, 2006.
75.	Cartwright AR, Kula K, Wright TJ: Craniofacial features associated with amelogenesis imperfecta, J Craniofac Genet
Dev Biol 19(3):148–156, 1999.
76.	Ravassipour DB, et al.: Variation in dental and skeletal open
bite malocclusion in humans with amelogenesis imperfecta, Arch Oral Biol 50(7):611–623, 2005.
77.	Aldred MJ, Crawford PJ: Amelogenesis imperfecta—towards
a new classification, Oral Dis 1(1):2–5, 1995.
78.	Hart PS, et al.: A nomenclature for X-linked amelogenesis
imperfecta, Arch Oral Biol 47(4):255–260, 2002.
79.	Hart PS, et al.: Identification of the enamelin (g.8344delG)
mutation in a new kindred and presentation of a standardized ENAM nomenclature, Arch Oral Biol 48(8):589–596,
2003.
80.	Stephanopoulos G, Garefalaki ME, Lyroudia K: Genes and
related proteins involved in amelogenesis imperfecta, J Dent
Res 84(12):1117–1126, 2005.

77

81.	Aldred MJ, et al.: Genetic heterogeneity in X-linked amelogenesis imperfecta, Genomics 14(3):567–573, 1992.
82.	Congleton J, Burkes EJ Jr: Amelogenesis imperfecta with
taurodontism, Oral Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol 48(6):540–544,
1979.
83.	Seow WK: Taurodontism of the mandibular first permanent molar distinguishes between the tricho-dento-osseous
(TDO) syndrome and amelogenesis imperfecta, Clin Genet
43(5):240–246, 1993.
84.	Price JA, et al.: A common DLX3 gene mutation is responsible for tricho-dento-osseous syndrome in Virginia and
North Carolina families, J Med Genet 35(10):825–828, 1998.
85.	Price JA, et al.: Tricho-dento-osseous syndrome and amelogenesis imperfecta with taurodontism are genetically distinct conditions, Clin Genet 56(1):35–40, 1999.
86.	Dong J, et al.: DLX3 mutation associated with autosomal
dominant amelogenesis imperfecta with taurodontism, Am
J Med Genet A 133A(2):138–141, 2005.
87.	Hall RK, Phakey P, Palamara J, McCredie DA: Amelogenesis
imperfecta and nephrocalcinosis syndrome: case studies of
clinical features and ultrastructure of tooth enamel in two
siblings, Oral Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol Oral Radiol Endod
79:583–592, 1995.
88.	Martelli-Júnior H, Santos Neto PE, Aquino SN, Santos CC,
Borges SP, Oliveira EA, Lopes MA: Coletta RD: Amelogenesis imperfecta and nephrocalcinosis syndrome: a case report and review of the literature, Nephron Physiol 118:62–65,
2011.
89.	Vervaet BA, Verhulst A, D’Haese PC, De Broe ME: Nephrocalcinosis: new insights into mechanisms and consequences,
Nephrol Dial Transplant 24:2030–2035, 2009.
90.	Patel RR, et al.: X-linked (recessive) hypomaturation amelogenesis imperfecta: a prosthodontic, genetic, and histopathologic report, J Prosthet Dent 66(3):398–402, 1991.
91.	Chaudhry AP, et al.: Odontogenesis imperfecta. Report of a
case, Oral Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol 14:1099–1103, 1961.
92.	Schimmelpfennig CB, McDonald RE: Enamel and dentine
aplasia; report of a case, Oral Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol
6(12):1444–1449, 1953.
93.	Gorlin RJ, Herman NG, Moss SJ: Complete absence of the
permanent dentition: an autosomal recessive disorder, Am
J Med Genet 5(2):207–209, 1980.
94.	Salinas CF, Jorgenson RJ, Wright JT, DiGiovanna JJ, Fete
MD: 2008 International Conference on Ectodermal Dysplasias Classification: conference report, Am J Med Genet
149A:1958–1969, 2009.
95.	Adaimy L, Chouery E, Megarbane H, Mroueh S, Delague
V, Nicolas E, Belguith H, de Mazancourt P, Megarbane A:
Mutation in WNT10A is associated with an autosomal recessive ectodermal dysplasia: the odonto-onycho-dermal
dysplasia, Am J Hum Genet 81:821–828, 2007.
96.	Ohring A, Stamm T, Spaich C, Haase C, Spree K, Hehr U,
Hoffmann M, Ledig S, Sel S, Wieacker P, Ropke A: WNT10A mutations are a frequent cause of a broad spectrum
of ectodermal dysplasias with sex-biased manifestation
pattern in heterozygotes, Am J Hum Genet 85:97–105,
2009.
97.	van den Boogaard M-J, Creton M, Bronkhorst Y, van der
Hout A, Hennekam E, Lindhout D, Cune M, Ploos van Amstel HK: Mutations in WNT10A are present in more than
half of isolated hypodontia cases, J Med Genet 49:327–331,
2012.
98.	Swallow JN: Complete anodontia of the permanent dentition, Br Dent J 107:143–145, 1959.
99.	Schneider PE: Complete anodontia of the permanent dentition: case report, Pediatr Dent 12(2):112–114, 1990.
100.	Laird GS: Congenital anodontia, J Am Dent Assoc 51:722,
1955.

78

Chapter 3

n

Acquired and Developmental Disturbances of the Teeth and Associated Oral Structures

101.	Witkop CJ Jr: Agenesis of succedaneous teeth: an expression of the homozygous state of the gene for the pegged
or missing maxillary lateral incisor trait, Am J Med Genet
26(2):431–436, 1987.
102.	Hoo JJ: Anodontia of permanent teeth (OMIM # 206780)
and pegged/missing maxillary lateral incisors (OMIM #
150400) in the same family, Am J Med Genet 90(4):326–327,
2000.
103.	Glenn FB: A consecutive six-year study of the prevalence of
congenitally missing teeth in private practice of two geographically separated areas, J Dent Child 31:269–270, 1964.
104.	Grahnen H: Hypodontia in the permanent dentition, Dent
Abstr 3:308–309, 1957.
105.	Vastardis H, et al.: A human MSX1 homeodomain missense mutation causes selective tooth agenesis, Nat Genet
13(4):417–421, 1996.
106.	Stockton DW, et al.: Mutation of PAX9 is associated with
oligodontia, Nat Genet 24(1):18–19, 2000.
107.	Liu W, Wang H, Zhao S, Zhao W, Bai S, Zhao Y, Xu S, Wu
C, Huang W, Chen Z, Feng G, He L: The novel gene locus
for agenesis of permanent teeth (He-Zhao deficiency) maps
to chromosome 10q11.2, J Dent Res 80:1716–1720, 2001.
108.	Noor A, Windpassinger C, Vitcu I, Orlic M, Rafiq MA, Khalid
M, Malik MN, Ayub M, Alman B, Vincent JB: Oligodontia
is caused by mutation in LTBP3, the gene encoding latent
TGF-beta binding protein 3, Am J Hum Genet 84:519–523,
2009.
109.	Han D, Gong Y, Wu H, Zhang X, Yan M, Wang X, Qu H,
Feng H, Song S: Novel EDA mutation resulting in X-linked
non-syndromic hypodontia and the pattern of EDA-associated isolated tooth agenesis, Eur J Med Genet 51:536–546,
2008.
110.	Vincent MC, Biancalana V, Ginisty D, Mandel JL, Calvas
P: Mutational spectrum of the ED1 gene in X-linked hypohidrotic ectodermal dysplasia, Eur J Hum Genet 9:355–363,
2001.
111.	Casal ML, Lewis JR, Mauldin EA, Tardivel A, Ingold K, Favre
M, Paradies F, Demotz S, Gaide O, Schneider P: Significant
correction of disease after postnatal administration of recombinant ectodysplasin A in canine X-linked ectodermal
dysplasia, Am J Hum Genet 81:1050–1056, 2007.
112.	Erpenstein H, Pfeiffer RA: [Sex-linked-dominant hereditary
reduction in number of teeth], Humangenetik 4(3):280–293,
1967.
113.	Ahmad W, et al.: A locus for autosomal recessive hypodontia with associated dental anomalies maps to chromosome
16q12.1, Am J Hum Genet 62(4):987–991, 1998.
114.	Bennett CG, Ronk SL: Congenitally missing primary teeth:
report of case, ASDC J Dent Child 47(5):346–348, 1980.
115.	Shashikiran ND, Karthik V, Subbareddy VV: Multiple congenitally missing primary teeth: report of a case, Pediatr
Dent 24(2):149–152, 2002.
116.	Fleming P, Nelson J, Gorlin RJ: Single maxillary central
incisor in association with mid-line anomalies, Br Dent
J 168(12):476–479, 1990.
117.	Cobourne MT: Familial human hypodontia—is it all in the
genes? Br Dent J 203(4):203–208, 2007.
118.	Becker A, Sharabi S, Chaushu S: Maxillary tooth size variation in dentitions with palatal canine displacement, Eur
J Orthod 24(3):313–318, 2002.
119.	Becker A, Gillis I, Shpack N: The etiology of palatal displacement of maxillary canines, Clin Orthod Res 2(2):62–66, 1999.
120.	Chaushu S, Sharabi S, Becker A: Tooth size in dentitions with
buccal canine ectopia, Eur J Orthod 25(5):485–491, 2003.
121.	Becker A: In defense of the guidance theory of palatal
canine displacement, Angle Orthod 65(2):95–98, 1995.

122.	Paschos E, et al.: Investigation of maxillary tooth sizes in
patients with palatal canine displacement, J Orofac Orthop
66(4):288–298, 2005.
123.	Peck S, Peck L, Kataja M: The palatally displaced canine
as a dental anomaly of genetic origin, Angle Orthod 64(4):
249–256, 1994.
124.	Lammi L, et al.: Mutations in AXIN2 cause familial tooth
agenesis and predispose to colorectal cancer, Am J Hum
Genet 74(5):1043–1050, 2004.
125.	Marvin ML, Mazzoni SM, Herron CM, Edwards S, Gruber
SB, Petty EM: AXIN2-associated autosomal dominant ectodermal dysplasia and neoplastic syndrome, Am J Med Genet
155A:898–902, 2011.
126.	Chalothorn LA, et al.: Hypodontia as a risk marker for epithelial ovarian cancer: a case-controlled study, J Am Dent
Assoc 139(2):163–169, 2008.
127.	Fekonja A, Čretnik A, Takac I: Hypodontia prevalence and
pattern in women with epithelial ovarian cancer. Angle Orthod
online ahead of print, http://dx.doi.org/10.2319/112813876.1.
128.	Bonds J, Pollan-White S, Xiang L, Mues G, D’Souza R: Is
there a link between ovarian cancer and tooth agenesis? Eur
J Med Genet 57(5):235–239, 2014.
129.	Küchler EC, Lips A, Tannure PN, Ho B, Costa MC, Granjeiro
JM, Vieira AR: Tooth agenesis association with self-reported
family history of cancer, J Dent Res 92(2):149–155, 2013.
130.	Salinas CF, Jorgenson RJ, Wright JT, DiGiovanna JJ, Fete
MD: 2008 International Conference on Ectodermal Dysplasias Classification: conference report, Am J Med Genet
149A:1958–1969, 2009.
131.	Monreal AW, Zonana J, Ferguson B: Identification of a new
splice form of the EDA1 gene permits detection of nearly all
X-linked hypohidrotic ectodermal dysplasia mutations, Am
J Hum Genet 63(2):380–389, 1998.
132.	Giansanti JS, Long SM, Rankin JL: The “tooth and nail” type
of autosomal dominant ectodermal dysplasia, Oral Surg Oral
Med Oral Pathol 37(4):576–582, 1974.
133.	Jumlongras D, et al.: A nonsense mutation in MSX1 causes
Witkop syndrome, Am J Hum Genet 69(1):67–74, 2001.
134.	Hudson CD, Witkop CJ: Autosomal dominant hypodontia
with nail dysgenesis. Report of twenty-nine cases in six families, Oral Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol 39(3):409–423, 1975.
135.	Nunn JH, et al.: The interdisciplinary management of hypodontia: background and role of paediatric dentistry, Br
Dent J 194(5):245–251, 2003.
136.	Neville BW, et al.: Oral and maxillofacial pathology, 2nd ed.,
Philadelphia, 2002, WB Saunders.
137.	Stoll BJ, Kliegman RM: Hemolytic disease of the newborn
(erythroblastosis fetalis). In Behrman RE, Kliegman RM,
Jenson HB, editors: Nelson textbook of pediatrics, Philadelphia, 2004, WB Saunders.
138.	Cullen CL: Erythroblastosis fetalis produced by Kell immunization: dental findings, Pediatr Dent 12(6):393–396, 1990.
139.	Sassa S: The porphyrias. In Behrman RE, Kliegman RM, Jenson HB, editors: Nelson textbook of pediatrics, Philadelphia,
2004, WB Saunders.
140.	Zegarelli EV, et al.: Discoloration of the teeth in a 24-yearold patient with cystic fibrosis of the pancreas not primarily
associated with tetracycline therapy. Report of a case, Oral
Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol 24(1):62–64, 1967.
141.	Wright JT, Hall KI, Grubb BR: Enamel mineral composition
of normal and cystic fibrosis transgenic mice, Adv Dent Res
10(2):270–274, 1996.
142.	Arquitt CK, Boyd C, Wright JT: Cystic fibrosis transmembrane regulator gene (CFTR) is associated with abnormal
enamel formation, J Dent Res 81(7):492–496, 2002.

Chapter 3

n

Acquired and Developmental Disturbances of the Teeth and Associated Oral Structures

143.	Primosch RE: Tetracycline discoloration, enamel defects,
and dental caries in patients with cystic fibrosis, Oral Surg
Oral Med Oral Pathol 50(4):301–308, 1980.
144.	van der Bijl P, Pitigoi-Aron G: Tetracyclines and calcified
tissues, Ann Dent 54(1-2):69–72, 1995.
145.	Moffitt JM, et al.: Prediction of tetracycline-induced tooth
discoloration, J Am Dent Assoc 88(3):547–552, 1974.
146.	Tredwin CJ, Scully C, Bagan-Sebastian JV: Drug-induced
disorders of teeth, J Dent Res 84(7):596–602, 2005.
147.	Brantley DH, Barnes KP, Haywood VB: Bleaching primary
teeth with 10% carbamide peroxide, Pediatr Dent 23(6):
514–516, 2001.
148.	Gorlin RJ, Cohen MM Jr, Hennekam RCM: Syndromes of the
head and neck, 4th ed., New York, 2001, Oxford University
Press.
149.	Hartsfield JK Jr: The benefits of obtaining the opinion of a
clinical geneticist regarding orthodontic patients. In Krishnan V, Davidovitch Z, editors: Integrated clinical orthodontics, Oxford, 2012, Wiley-Blackwell, pp 109–131.
150.	Pruzansky S, Richmond JB: Growth of mandible in infants
with micrognathia; clinical implications, Am J Dis Child
88(1):29–42, 1954.
151.	Daskalogiannakis J, Ross RB, Tompson BD: The mandibular
catch-up growth controversy in Pierre Robin sequence, Am
J Orthod Dentofacial Orthop 120(3):280–285, 2001.
152.	Hotz M, Gnoinski W: Clefts of the secondary palate associated
with the “Pierre Robin syndrome.” Management by early
maxillary orthopaedics, Swed Dent J Suppl 15:89–98, 1982.
153.	Dean JA, et al.: Prevention of airway obstruction in Pierre
Robin sequence via obturator use, Pediatr Dent 24:173–174,
2002. (abstract).
154.	Burket LW: Oral medicine: diagnosis and treatment, 7th ed.,
Philadelphia, 1977, JB Lippincott.
155.	Reynoso MC, et al.: Autosomal dominant congenital macroglossia: further delineation of the syndrome, Genet Couns
5(2):151–154, 1994.

79

156.	Keizer D: Casuistische mededelingen dominant erfeljik ankyloglosson, Nederl T Geneesk 96:2203–2205, 1952.
157.	Klockars T, Pitkaranta A: Inheritance of ankyloglossia
(tongue-tie), Clin Genet 75:98–99, 2009. (letter).
158.	Braybrook C, Doudney K, Marcano ACB, Arnason A, Bjornsson A, Patton MA, Goodfellow PJ, Moore GE, Stanier P:
The T-box transcription factor gene TBX22 is mutated in
X-linked cleft palate and ankyloglossia, Nature Genet 29:
179–183, 2001.
159.	Ayers FJ, Hilton LM: Treatment of ankyloglossia: report of
case, ASDC J Dent Child 44(3):237–239, 1977.
160.	Messner AH, Lalakea ML: The effect of ankyloglossia on
speech in children, Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg 127(6):
539–545, 2002.
161.	Kullaa-Mikkonen A: Familial study of fissured tongue, Scand
J Dent Res 96(4):366–375, 1988.
162.	Bánóczy J, Szabo L, Csiba A: Migratory glossitis. A clinicalhistologic review of seventy cases, Oral Surg Oral Med Oral
Pathol 39(1):113–121, 1975.
163.	Cooke BE: Median rhomboid glossitis. Candidiasis and not a
developmental anomaly, Br J Dermatol 93(4):399–405, 1975.
164.	Barasch A, et al.: Oral soft tissue manifestations in HIVpositive vs. HIV-negative children from an inner city
population: a two-year observational study, Pediatr Dent
22(3):215–220, 2000.
165.	Martinello RA, Cooney EL: Cerebellar brain abscess associated
with tongue piercing, Clin Infect Dis 36(2):e32–e34, 2003.
166.	Dyce O, et al.: Tongue piercing. The new “rusty nail?” Head
Neck 22(7):728–732, 2000.
167.	Akhondi H, Rahimi AR: Haemophilus aphrophilus endocarditis after tongue piercing, Emerg Infect Dis 8(8):850–851,
2002.
168.	Perkins CS, Meisner J, Harrison JM: A complication of
tongue piercing, Br Dent J 182(4):147–148, 1997.
169.	Keogh IJ, O’Leary G: Serious complication of tongue piercing,
J Laryngol Otol 115(3):233–234, 2001.

CHAPTER

4

Development and Morphology
of the Primary Teeth
s Erwin G. Turner and Jeffrey A. Dean

For additional resources, please visit the

website.

CHAPTER OUTLINE
LIFE CYCLE OF THE TOOTH
Initiation (Bud Stage)
Proliferation (Cap Stage)
Histodifferentiation and
Morphodifferentiation
(Bell Stage)
Apposition
Calcification
EARLY DEVELOPMENT AND
CALCIFICATION OF THE
ANTERIOR PRIMARY TEETH

EARLY DEVELOPMENT AND
CALCIFICATION OF THE
POSTERIOR PRIMARY TEETH AND
THE FIRST PERMANENT MOLAR
MORPHOLOGY OF INDIVIDUAL
PRIMARY TEETH
Maxillary Central Incisor
Maxillary Lateral Incisor
Maxillary Canine
Mandibular Central Incisor
Mandibular Lateral Incisor

T

his chapter presents a brief review of the development of the teeth. An accurate chronology of primary tooth calcification is of clinical significance
to the dentist. It is often necessary to explain to parents
the time sequence of calcification in utero and during infancy. The common observations of tetracycline pigmentation, developmental enamel defects, and generalized
hereditary anomalies can be explained if the calcification
schedule is known. A brief discussion of the morphology
of the primary teeth is also appropriate before restorative
procedures are considered for children.
A complete review is available in the reference texts
on oral histology, dental anatomy, and developmental
anatomy listed at the end of the chapter. Furthermore,
contemporary scientists are rapidly gaining knowledge
of tooth development at the molecular level. We suggest that readers with a special interest in the molecular
events of tooth development study the listed references
by Smith1 and by Miletich and Sharpe.2

LIFE CYCLE OF THE TOOTH
INITIATION (BUD STAGE)
Evidence of development of the human tooth can be observed as early as the sixth week of embryonic life. Cells
in the basal layer of the oral epithelium proliferate at a
more rapid rate than do the adjacent cells. The result is
an epithelial thickening in the region of the future dental
arch that extends along the entire free margin of the jaws.
This thickening is called the primordium of the ectodermal
portion of the teeth and what results is called the dental
80

Mandibular Canine
Maxillary First Molar
Maxillary Second Molar
Mandibular First Molar
Mandibular Second Molar
MORPHOLOGIC DIFFERENCES
BETWEEN PRIMARY AND
PERMANENT TEETH
SIZE AND MORPHOLOGY OF THE
PRIMARY TOOTH PULP CHAMBER

lamina. At the same time, 10 round or ovoid swellings
occur in each jaw in the position to be occupied by the
primary teeth.
Certain cells of the basal layer begin to proliferate at
a more rapid rate than do the adjacent cells (Fig. 4-1, A).
These proliferating cells contain the entire growth potential of the teeth. The permanent molars, like the primary
teeth, arise from the dental lamina. The permanent incisors, canines, and premolars develop from the buds of
their primary predecessors. The congenital absence of a
tooth is the result of a lack of initiation or an arrest in the
proliferation of cells. The presence of supernumerary teeth
is the result of continued budding of the enamel organ.

PROLIFERATION (CAP STAGE)
Proliferation of the cells continues during the cap stage. As
a result of unequal growth in the different parts of the bud,
a cap is formed (Fig. 4-1, B). A shallow invagination appears
on the deep surface of the bud. The peripheral cells of the
cap later form the outer and inner enamel epithelium.
As with a deficiency in initiation, a deficiency in proliferation results in failure of the tooth germ to develop and
in fewer than the normal numbers of teeth. Excessive proliferation of cells may result in epithelial rests. These rests
may remain inactive or become activated due to an irritation or stimulus. If the cells become partially differentiated or detached from the enamel organ in their partially
differentiated state, they assume the secretory functions
common to all epithelial cells, and a cyst develops. If the
cells become more fully differentiated or detached from
the enamel organ, they produce enamel and dentin, which
results in an odontoma (Fig. 3-5) or a supernumerary

Chapter 4

A

B

C

D

Figure 4-1 Life cycle of the tooth. A, Initiation (bud stage).

B, Proliferation (cap stage). C, Histodifferentiation and
morphologic differentiation (bell stage). D, Apposition and
calcification. (Adapted from Bath-Balogh M, Fehrenbach
MJ: Illustrated dental embryology, histology, and anatomy,
ed 2, Philadelphia, 2006, Saunders.)

tooth. The degree of differentiation of the cells determines whether a cyst, an odontoma, or a supernumerary
tooth develops (Fig. 22-52).

HISTODIFFERENTIATION AND
MORPHODIFFERENTIATION (BELL STAGE)
The epithelium continues to invaginate and deepen until
the enamel organ takes on the shape of a bell (Fig. 4-1, C).
It is during this stage that the cells of the dental papilla
differentiate into odontoblasts and those of the inner
enamel epithelium differentiate into ameloblasts.
Histodifferentiation marks the end of the proliferative
stage as the cells lose their capacity to multiply. This stage
is the forerunner of appositional activity. Disturbances
in the differentiation of the formative cells of the tooth
germ result in abnormal structure of the dentin or enamel.
One clinical example of the failure of ameloblasts to differentiate properly is amelogenesis imperfecta (Figs. 3-32
and 3-33). The failure of the odontoblasts to differentiate
properly, with the resultant abnormal dentin structure,
results in dentinogenesis imperfecta (Fig. 3-31).
In the morphodifferentiation stage, the formative
cells are arranged to outline the form and size of the
tooth. This process occurs before matrix deposition.
The morphologic pattern of the tooth becomes established when the inner enamel epithelium is arranged
so that the boundary between it and the odontoblasts
outlines the future dentino-enamel junction. Disturbances and aberrations in morphodifferentiation lead
to abnormal forms and sizes of teeth, resulting in conditions such as peg teeth, other types of microdontia, and
macrodontia.

APPOSITION
Appositional growth is the result of a layer-like deposition of a nonvital extracellular secretion in the form of a
tissue matrix. This matrix is deposited by the formative

n

Development and Morphology of the Primary Teeth

81

cells, ameloblasts, and odontoblasts, which line up along
the future dentino-enamel and dentinocemental junction
at the stage of morphodifferentiation. These cells deposit
the enamel and dentin matrix in a definite pattern and
at a definite rate. The formative cells begin their work at
specific sites that are referred to as growth centers as soon as
the blueprint, the dentino-enamel junction, is completed
(Fig. 4-1, D).
Any systemic disturbance or local trauma that injures
the ameloblasts during enamel formation can cause an interruption or an arrest in matrix apposition, which results
in enamel hypoplasia (Fig. 3-16). Hypoplasia of the dentin is less common than enamel hypoplasia and occurs
only after severe systemic disturbances (Fig. 3-15).

CALCIFICATION
Calcification (mineralization) takes place following matrix deposition and involves the precipitation of inorganic calcium salts within the deposited matrix. The process
begins with the precipitation of a small nidus, and further precipitation occurs around it. The original nidus increases in size by the addition of concentric laminations.
There is an eventual approximation and fusion of these
individual calcospherites into a homogeneously mineralized layer of tissue matrix. If the calcification process is
disturbed, there is a lack of fusion of the calcospherites.
These deficiencies are not readily identified in the enamel, but in the dentin they are evident microscopically and
are referred to as interglobular dentin.

EARLY DEVELOPMENT AND
CALCIFICATION OF THE ANTERIOR
PRIMARY TEETH
Kraus and Jordan found that the first macroscopic indication of morphologic development occurs at approximately 11 weeks in utero.3 The maxillary and mandibular
central incisor crowns appear identical at this early stage
as tiny, hemispheric, moundlike structures.
The lateral incisors begin to develop morphologic characteristics between 13 and 14 weeks. There is evidence of
the developing canines between 14 and 16 weeks. Calcification of the central incisor begins at approximately 14
weeks in utero, with the maxillary central incisor slightly
preceding the mandibular central incisor. The initial calcification of the lateral incisor occurs at 16 weeks and that
of the canine at 17 weeks.
The developmental dates listed precede by 3 to 4 weeks
the dates that appear in the chronology of the human
dentition as developed by Logan and Kronfeld.4 This observation has been confirmed by Lunt and Law.5

EARLY DEVELOPMENT AND
CALCIFICATION OF THE POSTERIOR
PRIMARY TEETH AND THE FIRST
PERMANENT MOLAR
The maxillary first primary molar appears macroscopically at 12½ weeks in utero. Kraus and Jordan3 observed that,
as early as 15½ weeks, the apex of the mesiobuccal cusp
may undergo calcification. At approximately 34 weeks

82

Chapter 4

n

Development and Morphology of the Primary Teeth

the entire occlusal surface is covered by calcified tissue. At
birth, calcification includes roughly three fourths of the
occlusal gingival height of the crown.
The maxillary second primary molar also appears macroscopically at about 12½ weeks in utero. There is evidence of calcification of the mesiobuccal cusp as early as
19 weeks. At birth, calcification extends occlusogingivally
to include approximately one fourth of the height of the
crown.
The mandibular first primary molar initially becomes
evident macroscopically at about 12 weeks in utero. Calcification may be observed as early as 15½ weeks at the
apex of the mesiobuccal cusp. At birth, a completely calcified cap covers the occlusal surface.
The mandibular second primary molar also becomes
evident macroscopically at 12½ weeks in utero. According
to Kraus and Jordan, calcification may begin at 18 weeks.3
At the time of birth, the five centers have coalesced, and
only a small area of uncalcified tissue remains in the
middle of the occlusal surface. There are sharp conical
cusps, angular ridges, and a smooth occlusal surface, all
of which indicate that calcification of these areas is incomplete at birth. Thus there is a calcification sequence
of central incisor, first molar, lateral incisor, canine, and
second molar.
The work of Kraus and Jordan indicates that the adjacent second primary and the first permanent molars undergo identical patterns of morphodifferentiation but at
different times, and the initial development of the first
permanent molar occurs slightly later. Their research has
also shown that the first permanent molars are uncalcified before 28 weeks of age; calcification may begin at
any time thereafter. Some degree of calcification is always
present at birth. In addition, Marita and others,6 using
first permanent and second primary molars, reported that
their patterns of cusp shape variability differ from each
other and that temporal factors contribute to the patterns
of size variability, while shape variability is influenced
more by topographic factors.

C

B

F

E

A

D

Figure 4-2 Primary right anterior teeth, labial aspect. A,
Maxillary central incisor. B, Maxillary lateral incisor. C,
Maxillary canine. D, Mandibular central incisor. E, Mandibular lateral incisor. F, Mandibular canine. (From Nelson SJ:
Wheeler’s dental anatomy, physiology, and occlusion, ed 9,
Philadelphia, 2010, WB Saunders.)

MAXILLARY CANINE

MORPHOLOGY OF INDIVIDUAL
PRIMARY TEETH

The crown of the maxillary canine is more constricted
at the cervical region than are the incisors, and the incisal
and distal surfaces are more convex. There is a welldeveloped sharp cusp rather than a relatively straight incisal
edge. The canine has a long, slender, tapering root that is
more than twice the length of the crown. The root is usually
inclined distally, apical to the middle third.

MAXILLARY CENTRAL INCISOR

MANDIBULAR CENTRAL INCISOR

The mesiodistal width of the crown of the maxillary central incisor is greater than the cervico-incisal length. Developmental lines are usually not evident in the crown;
thus the labial surface is smooth. The incisal edge is
nearly straight even before abrasion becomes evident.
There are well-developed marginal ridges on the lingual
surface and a distinctly developed cingulum (Figs. 4-2
and 4-3). The root of the incisor is conical with tapered
sides.

The mandibular central incisor is smaller than the maxillary central incisor, but its labiolingual measurement is
usually only 1 mm less. The labial aspect presents a flat
surface without developmental grooves. The lingual surface presents marginal ridges and a cingulum. The middle
third and the incisal third on the lingual surface may
have a flattened surface level with the marginal ridges,
or there may be a slight concavity. The incisal edge is
straight and bisects the crown labiolingually. The root is
approximately twice the length of the crown.

MAXILLARY LATERAL INCISOR
The outline of the maxillary lateral incisor is similar to
that of the central incisor, but the crown is smaller in all
dimensions. The length of the crown from the cervical to
the incisal edge is greater than the mesiodistal width. The
root outline is similar to that of the central incisor but is
longer in proportion to the crown.

MANDIBULAR LATERAL INCISOR
The outline of the mandibular lateral incisor is similar to
that of the central incisor but is somewhat larger in all dimensions except labiolingually. The lingual surface may
have greater concavity between the marginal ridges. The
incisal edge slopes toward the distal aspect of the tooth.

Chapter 4

A

B

C

D

E

F

Figure 4-3 Primary right anterior teeth, lingual aspect.

A, Maxillary central incisor. B, Maxillary lateral incisor. C,
Maxillary canine. D, Mandibular central incisor. E, Mandibular lateral incisor. F, Mandibular canine. (From Nelson SJ:
Wheeler’s dental anatomy, physiology, and occlusion, ed 9,
Philadelphia, 2010, WB Saunders.)

n

Development and Morphology of the Primary Teeth

B

83

A

D

C

Figure 4-4 Primary right molars, buccal aspect. A, Maxil-

lary first molar. B, Maxillary second molar. C, Mandibular
first molar. D, Mandibular second molar. (From Nelson SJ:
Wheeler’s dental anatomy, physiology, and occlusion, ed 9,
Philadelphia, 2010, WB Saunders.)

MANDIBULAR CANINE
The form of the mandibular canine is similar to that of
the maxillary canine, with a few exceptions. The crown
is slightly shorter, and the root may be as much as 2 mm
shorter than that of the maxillary canine. The mandibular canine is not as large labiolingually as its maxillary
counterpart.

MAXILLARY FIRST MOLAR
The greatest dimension of the crown of the maxillary first
molar is at the mesiodistal contact areas, and from these
areas the crown converges toward the cervical region
(Figs. 4-4, 4-5, and 4-6).
The mesiolingual cusp is the largest and sharpest. The
distolingual cusp is poorly defined, small, and rounded.
The buccal surface is smooth, with little evidence of developmental grooves. The three roots are long, slender,
and widely spread.

A

B

C

D

MAXILLARY SECOND MOLAR
There is a considerable resemblance between the maxillary
second primary molar and the maxillary first permanent
molar. There are two well-defined buccal cusps, with a developmental groove between them. The crown of the second molar is considerably larger than that of the first molar.
The bifurcation between the buccal roots is close to
the cervical region. The roots are longer and heavier than
those of the first primary molar, and the lingual root is

Figure 4-5 Primary right molars, lingual aspect. A, Maxil-

lary first molar. B, Maxillary second molar. C, Mandibular
first molar. D, Mandibular second molar. (From Nelson SJ:
Wheeler’s dental anatomy, physiology, and occlusion, ed 9,
Philadelphia, 2010, WB Saunders.)

84

Chapter 4

n

Development and Morphology of the Primary Teeth

aspect, there is an extreme curvature buccally at the cervical third. The crown length is greater in the mesiobuccal
area than in the mesiolingual area; thus the cervical line
slants upward from the buccal to the lingual surface.
The longer slender roots spread considerably at the
apical third, extending beyond the outline of the crown.
The mesial root, when viewed from the mesial aspect,
does not resemble any other primary root. The buccal and
lingual outlines of the root drop straight down from the
crown, being essentially parallel for more than half their
length. The end of the root is flat and almost square.

A

B

C

MANDIBULAR SECOND MOLAR

D

Figure 4-6 Primary right molars, mesial aspect. A, Maxil-

lary first molar. B, Maxillary second molar. C, Mandibular
first molar. D, Mandibular second molar. (From Nelson SJ:
Wheeler’s dental anatomy, physiology, and occlusion, ed 9,
Philadelphia, 2010, WB Saunders.)

large and thick compared with the other roots (Figs. 4-4
and 4-5).
The lingual surface has three cusps: a mesiolingual
cusp that is large and well developed, a distolingual cusp,
and a third and smaller supplemental cusp (the cusp of
Carabelli). A well-defined groove separates the mesiolingual cusp from the distolingual cusp. On the occlusal surface a prominent oblique ridge connects the mesiolingual
cusp with the distobuccal cusp (Fig. 4-7).

MANDIBULAR FIRST MOLAR
Unlike the other primary teeth, the first primary molar
does not resemble any of the permanent teeth. The mesial
outline of the tooth, when viewed from the buccal aspect,
is almost straight from the contact area to the cervical
region. The distal area of the tooth is shorter than the
mesial area.
The two distinct buccal cusps have no evidence of a
distinct developmental groove between them; the mesial
cusp is the larger of the two.
There is a pronounced lingual convergence of the
crown on the mesial aspect, with a rhomboid outline
present on the distal aspect. The mesiolingual cusp is long
and sharp at the tip; a developmental groove separates
this cusp from the distolingual cusp, which is rounded
and well developed. The mesial marginal ridge is well developed, to the extent that it appears as another small
cusp lingually. When the tooth is viewed from the mesial

The mandibular second molar resembles the mandibular first permanent molar, except that the primary tooth
is smaller in all its dimensions. The buccal surface is divided into three cusps that are separated by mesiobuccal and distobuccal developmental grooves. The cusps
are almost equal in size. Two cusps of almost equal size
are evident on the lingual surface and are divided by a
short lingual groove.
The primary second molar, when viewed from the
occlusal surface, appears rectangular with a slight distal
convergence of the crown. The mesial marginal ridge is de­
veloped to a greater extent than the distal marginal ridge.
One difference between the crown of the primary molar and that of the first permanent molar is in the distobuccal cusp; the distal cusp of the permanent molar is
smaller than the other two buccal cusps.
The roots of the primary second molar are long and
slender, with a characteristic flare mesiodistally in the
middle and apical thirds.

MORPHOLOGIC DIFFERENCES BETWEEN
PRIMARY AND PERMANENT TEETH
Cleghorn and others7 state that the morphology of the
primary dentition is different in many respects from that
of the permanent dentition, and not only in the sizes of
the crowns and roots. They have outlined these morphologic differences (Box 4-1).

SIZE AND MORPHOLOGY OF THE
PRIMARY TOOTH PULP CHAMBER
Considerable individual variation exists in the sizes of
the pulp chambers and pulp canals of the primary teeth.
Immediately after tooth eruption, the pulp chambers are
large and generally follow the outline of the crown. They
decrease in size as age increases and under the influence
of both function and abrasion of the occlusal and incisal
surfaces of the teeth.
No attempt is made here to describe in detail each pulp
chamber outline; rather, it is suggested that the dentist
examine critically the bitewing radiographs of the child
before undertaking operative procedures. Just as there
are individual differences in the calcification and eruption times of teeth, so are there individual differences in
the morphology of the crowns and the size of the pulp
chamber. However, radiographs do not demonstrate completely the extent of the pulp horn into the cuspal area.

Chapter 4

CDG
DBC
BDG

MBC

Development and Morphology of the Primary Teeth

85

BDG

CP

MBC

DBC
OR

DDG

n

BDG

MTF
DTF
MP
CP

DLC

A

MLC

CDG

MBC

DBC

MP

DDG

CDG
MLC

DLC
LDG

B
DBC
MBC
MBDG

BDG

MLC

CP
DLC

LDC

C

MP
MLC

D

FC

CP
DC
DBDG
DP
CDG
DLC
LDG

Figure 4-7 Primary right molars, occlusal aspect.

A, Maxillary first molar. B, Maxillary second
molar. C, Mandibular first molar. D, Mandibular second molar. BDG, Buccal developmental
groove; CDG, central developmental groove;
CP, central pit; DBC, distobuccal cusp; DBDG,
distobuccal developmental groove; DC, distal
cusp; DDG, distal developmental groove; DLC,
distolingual cusp; DP, distal pit; DTF, distal
triangular fossa; FC, fifth cusp; LDG, lingual
developmental groove; MBC, mesiobuccal cusp;
MBDG, mesiobuccal developmental groove;
MLC, mesiolingual cusp; MP, mesial pit; MTF,
mesial triangular fossa; OR, oblique ridge. (From
Nelson SJ: Wheeler’s dental anatomy, physiology,
and occlusion, ed 9, Philadelphia, 2010,
WB Saunders.)

Box 4-1
Characteristics of Teeth in the Primary Dentition
Crowns
The crowns in the primary dentition are shorter relative to
the length of the root (i.e., smaller crown: root ratio).
The occlusal tables of primary molars are constricted buccolingually and much narrower mesiodistally when compared with those of the permanent molars.
Enamel and dentin are thinner compared with permanent
teeth.
The thickness of the enamel and dentin of primary teeth is
approximately half that of permanent teeth.
The enamel rod direction in the cervical area is angled occlusally compared with the apical direction in permanent
teeth.
Crowns of primary teeth are characterized by significant
cervical constriction in both the mesiodistal and faciolingual dimensions.
The primary molars have a pronounced buccal cervical
bulge.
The contact areas of primary molars are flat and very broad
buccolingually compared with the permanent molars.
The crown color of the primary teeth is whiter and a lighter
shade.
Roots
The roots of the primary molars have a greater flare, which
accommodates the developing crowns of the succedaneous permanent premolars of the permanent dentition.

The mesiodistal width of the roots of primary anterior teeth
is much narrower than the crown when compared with
those of the permanent anterior teeth.
The primary molar roots are relatively longer and more
slender, i.e., mandibular molar roots are narrower mesiodistally, maxillary MB and DB roots are narrower
mesiodistally, and maxillary palatal roots are narrower
buccolingually.
Pulp and Root Canal Systems
The size of the pulp relative to the crown is larger in the
primary teeth.
Pulp horns are higher in proportion and are located closer
to the DEJ and to the outer surface of the crown.
Mesial pulp horns are higher than distal pulp horns.
Pulp chambers are shaped comparably with the shape of
the outline of the crown from an occlusal view.
Pulp horns are present under each cusp of the primary molars.
The pulp chambers of primary mandibular molar teeth are
normally larger than the pulp chambers of primary maxillary molars.
The root canal system of fully developed primary molars is
extremely tortuous and complex.

Used with permission from Cleghorn BM, Boorberg NB, Christie WH. Primary human teeth and their root canal systems, Endodontic Topics 23:6-33,
2010.

86

Chapter 4

n

Development and Morphology of the Primary Teeth

In addition, the cemento-enamel junction of primary
teeth presents three interesting morphologic relationships, in which the cementum is over enamel, the cementum and enamel are edge to edge, or there is a gap
between the cementum and enamel with dentin exposure. This irregularity in the cemento-enamel junction
may indicate the need for care during restorative and
other procedures to avoid damage.8

REFERENCES
1.	Smith CE: Cellular and chemical events during enamel maturation, Crit Rev Oral Biol Med 9:128–161, 1998.
2.	Miletich I, Sharpe PT: Normal and abnormal dental development, Hum Mol Genet 12:R69–R73, 2003.
3.	Kraus BS, Jordan RE: The human dentition before birth, Philadelphia, 1965, Lea & Febiger.
4.	Logan WHG, Kronfeld R: Development of the human jaws
and surrounding structures from birth to the age of fifteen
years, J Am Dent Assoc 20:379–427, 1933.

5.	Lunt RC, Law DB: A review of the chronology of calcification
of deciduous teeth, J Am Dent Assoc 89:599–606, 1974.
6.	Morita W, Yano W, Nagaoka T, et al.: Size and shape variability in human molars during odontogenesis, J Dent Res
93:275–280, 2014.
7.	Cleghorn BM, Boorberg NB, Christie WH: Primary human
teeth and their root canal systems, Endodontic Topics 23:6–33,
2012.
8.	Francischone LA, Consolaro A: Morphology of the cemento­
enamel junction of primary teeth, J Dent Child 75:252–259,
2008.

SUGGESTED READINGS
Chiego D: Essentials of oral histology and embryology, ed 4, St.
Louis, 2013, Mosby.
Nanci A: Ten Cate’s oral histology, ed 8, St. Louis, 2013, Mosby.
Nelson SJ: Wheeler’s dental anatomy, physiology, and occlusion, ed
9, Philadelphia, 2010, WB Saunders.
Schour I, Massler M: Studies in tooth development: the growth
pattern of human teeth, J Am Dent Assoc 27:1778–1793, 1940.

CHAPTER

5

Clinical Genetics for the
Dental Practitioner
s James K. Hartsfield Jr.

For additional resources, please visit the

website.

CHAPTER OUTLINE
REVIEW OF GENETIC PRINCIPLES
CELL DIFFERENTIATION AND
DEVELOPMENTAL BIOLOGY
CHROMOSOMES
HEREDITARY TRAITS IN FAMILIES
DEVELOPMENTAL BIOLOGY OF
ENAMEL
AUTOSOMAL-DOMINANT
INHERITANCE
AUTOSOMAL-RECESSIVE
INHERITANCE

X-LINKED OR SEX-LINKED
INHERITANCE
X-Linked Dominant
X-Linked Recessive
VARIATION IN GENE EXPRESSION
Penetrance
Expressivity
Epigenetics
MULTIFACTORIAL INHERITANCE
Multifactorial (Complex) Inheritance
in Human Diseases

T

he purpose of this chapter is twofold: to review genetic principles and to mention a few examples of
the influence of genetic factors on major craniofacial, oral, and dental conditions. As the basis for relatively
rare developmental dysplasias, diseases, and syndromes
that show a genetic cause or marked genetic influence becomes known, increasing attention is being paid to those
genetic factors that influence (or are associated with)
more common conditions. An increased appreciation of
how genetic factors interact with environmental (nongenetic) factors to influence growth and pathology will lead
to an increased understanding of pathogenesis and the
recognition that some groups or individuals may be more
susceptible or that they may respond differently to treatment. Further information may be found online in the
Genetics Home Reference—Your Guide to Understanding
Genetic Conditions at http://ghr.nlm.nih.gov.

REVIEW OF GENETIC PRINCIPLES
The genome contains the entire genetic content of a set
of chromosomes present within a cell or an organism.
Within the genome are genes that represent the smallest
physical and functional units of inheritance that reside
in specific sites (called loci or locus for a single location).
A gene can be defined as the entire DNA sequence
necessary for the synthesis of a functional polypeptide
molecule (production of a protein via a messenger RNA
intermediate) or RNA molecule (transfer RNA and ribosomal RNA). Genotype generally refers to the set of genes
that an individual carries and, in particular, usually
refers to the specific pair of alleles (alternative forms of

INFLUENCE OF GENETIC FACTORS
ON MAJOR CRANIOFACIAL,
ORAL, AND DENTAL CONDITIONS
GENETICS AND DENTAL CARIES
GENETICS AND PERIODONTAL DISEASE
Aggressive (Early-Onset)
Periodontitis
GENETICS OF MALOCCLUSION
EXTERNAL APICAL ROOT
RESORPTION
GENETICS OF CLEFT LIP AND PALATE

a particular gene) that a person has at a given location
(locus) of his/her total collection of DNA, called that
individual’s genome. In contrast, phenotype is the observable properties and physical characteristics of an individual, as determined by the individual’s genotype and
the environment in which the individual develops over
a period of time.
Remarkable advances in the biochemical techniques
used to study cell molecular biology and DNA have taken
researchers to the threshold of understanding the regulation of cell functions. To illustrate, not so long ago, DNA
analyses were performed on minute amounts (picograms)
of DNA. This limitation was necessary because there was
so little DNA available for study in samples. When investigators discovered the DNA polymerase enzyme that
could replicate DNA through the polymerase chain reaction and make it by the gram, this problem of samples
disappeared. This advance facilitated the completion of
the human genome project, which resulted in not only
the definition of a single human genome sequence composed of overlapping parts from many humans but also
an expanding catalogue of more than one million sites
of variation in the human genome sequence. These variations (or polymorphisms) may be used as markers for genetic analysis (including analysis of genetic-environmental interaction) in human beings. The genome varies from
one individual to the next, most often in terms of single
base changes of DNA, called single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs, pronounced “snips”). The main use of this
human SNP map will be to determine the contributions
of genes to diseases (or nondisease phenotypes) that have
complex, multifactorial bases (Fig. 5-1).
87

88

Chapter 5

n

Clinical Genetics for the Dental Practitioner

Figure 5-1 Single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) genotyping endpoint fluorescence scatter plot. Each triangle is an individual

located in an area that is homozygous for one of the gene variants (alleles), or homozygous for the other gene variant (allele),
or has one of each (heterozygous). The individual’s genotype for that specific SNP can be determined by the location of the
symbol for that person on the scatter plot. For example, this is a plot for the catechol O-methyltransferase gene SNP, which
is important in pain perception. The individuals indicated by the green triangles are GG, the individuals marked by the red
triangles are AG, and the blue triangles are those who are AA. The gray samples in the lower left corner are control individuals
who had water with no DNA sample to check for contamination of the components. [From Hartsfield JK Jr et al: Pain perception following orthodontic separator placement and COMT haplotype. J Dent Res 93(Spec Iss B): abstract number 1674, 2014
(www.dentalresearch.org).]
Information about genetic influences on clinical questions is starting to accelerate due to what is referred to
as next-generation or “deep” sequencing. Compared with
the methods used in the human genome project over 10
years ago, modern sequencers are 50,000-fold faster, and
therefore proportionately cheaper (Fig. 5-2). Although
costs are decreasing, generating high coverage across the
entire genome (referred to as whole genome sequencing,

or WGS) is still expensive. So, a common alternative is to
use hybridization capture to enrich a DNA sample only
for sequences in the exons of coding genes (known as the
“exome”), resulting in whole exome sequencing (WES).1
Determination of the genes responsible for still-unknown
Mendelian (single-gene) and complex diseases and traits
presents an immediate opportunity for this technology to
be used to move from approaches based on only partial

Chapter 5

n

Clinical Genetics for the Dental Practitioner

89

Figure 5-2 Genome sequencing cost in USD as estimated by the National Human Genome Research Institute. In comparison

with hypothetical data reflecting Moore’s law, which describes a long-term trend in the computer hardware industry that
involves the doubling of “compute power” every 2 years, the progress in decreasing the costs of genomic sequencing has
been spectacular. [From Wetterstrand KA: DNA sequencing costs: data from the NHGRI Genome Sequencing Program (GSP);
available at: www.genome.gov/sequencingcosts. Accessed 5-7-2014.]
information (genetic linkage and genome-wide association studies, GWAS) to complete analysis of the relationship between genomic variation and phenotype.2

CELL DIFFERENTIATION AND
DEVELOPMENTAL BIOLOGY
It is fascinating that a single fertilized ovum contains
within itself the potential for development of the incredibly complicated human organism. Cellular differentiation is a critical component of this developmental process
and, aside from the development of antibody diversity,
typically occurs in the absence of genetic alteration or
mutation. Different types of cells gain their specific identities from a particular subset of the approximately 30,000
or more genes present within the genome. The types of
polypeptides that a cell can synthesize include: enzymes,
which catalyze various activities of cellular metabolism
and homeostasis; structural proteins, which form the intracellular and extracellular scaffolding or cellular matrix;
and regulatory proteins, which convey signals from the
outside of the cell to the nucleus and modulate or control
specific gene expression. In a developing embryo, cells reside in a three-dimensional environment and respond to
signals from themselves (autocrine), from nearby sources
(paracrine), and from anatomically distant sources (endocrine). Many of these signals are mediated by soluble
molecules (either peptide or nonpeptide in origin) that
bind to specific receptors (proteins) present on the surface or on the inside of cells. In addition to signals from

soluble factors, cells can respond to cell-to-cell or cell-toextracellular matrix signals.3
The action of “turning on” or “turning off” specific
genes, referred to as regulation of gene expression, is carefully orchestrated and remains a critical element in the
determination of cell specificity and tissue morphogenesis. Transcription factors bind to DNA and either facilitate or suppress initiation of gene transcription, the
most common control point of gene expression. In the
development of the craniofacial complex, there is increasing evidence for the role of homeobox-containing gene
families that encode transcription factors. These then are
critical for the control of complex interactions between
and among genes that are subsequently expressed during
development.
In summary:
  
1.	The genetic message lies in the DNA itself, which is
coded and transmitted from cell generation to cell
generation when these DNA molecules are replicated
(or duplicated).
2.	A given cell type and function are defined by the
specific RNA molecules made from the DNA master.
These RNA molecular copies direct protein synthesis
in the cell.
3.	Transcription factors determine which genes are
expressed through the production of the RNA and
subsequent protein.
4.	Environmental factors can influence the modification
of gene expression through the addition or removal of
chemical moieties such as methyl and acetyl groups

90

Chapter 5

n

Clinical Genetics for the Dental Practitioner

1

6

2

7

3

8

4

9

5

10

11

12

13

14

15

16

17

18

19

20

21

22

X

Y

Figure 5-3 Banded karyotype of a male with trisomy of chromosome 21 (Down syndrome). (Courtesy Cytogenetic Laborato-

ries, Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis.)

to the DNA or supporting structures, referred to as
epigenetics. If present in the germ line, these changes
can be inherited along with the DNA sequence.
5.	Development occurs through the action of specific
transcription factors and other regulators of protein
production on specific genes that need to be expressed next in time.

CHROMOSOMES
DNA is grouped into units called chromosomes. Humans
have 46 chromosomes that contain an estimated 30,000
genes, including numerous duplicates. Of the 46 chromosomes, the sex chromosomes are the X and Y and the
remaining 44 chromosomes are referred to as autosomes.
Each autosome has a paired mate that is referred to as its
homologue. Therefore, with the exception of some of the
genes on the X and Y chromosomes in males, there are
at least two copies of each gene unless a piece of DNA is
deleted. Thus the human chromosome complement consists of 23 pairs of chromosomes (one pair of sex chromosomes and 22 pairs of autosomes).
Lejeune and colleagues demonstrated that the fundamental cause of Down syndrome is the presence of an
extra specific chromosome (number 21) in the affected individual’s cells.4 When an entire extra chromosome is present, the condition is called a trisomy of the chromosome
in question; for example, trisomy 21 for Down syndrome.
Figure 5-3 shows the karyotype of a male who has Down
syndrome. The extra chromosome in the group of number
21 and number 22 chromosomes is readily apparent.
Since this report in 1959, many disease states have
been shown to be associated with an incorrect chromosome complement. By using first the microscopic study
of chromosome structure, and now the chromosomal

microarray approach with considerable refinement, it
was shown that alterations in the fine structure of chromosomes, as well as in their number, could be present.
Monosomy of an autosome, or a missing autosomal chromosome, had not been believed to be compatible with
life, but several monosomies in live-born children have
now been reported. Monosomy of the sex chromosomes
can be compatible with life and typically affects development of both internal and external sex organs of the
individuals. The best-known example of this is Turner
syndrome, which occurs in approximately 1 in every 5000
live female births. These persons are phenotypic females
who are usually missing one of the X chromosomes and
are chromosomally designated as 45, X. Other aberrations
of the X chromosome may also cause Turner syndrome.
Affected individuals are typically short of stature, lack
secondary gender characteristics, and are sterile. Table
5-1 lists common chromosomal aberrations that produce
clinical disease, including examples of translocations (the
attachment of a broken piece from one chromosome to
another, but not homologous, chromosome) and deletions (the absence of a piece of a chromosome).
Chromosome abnormalities are an important cause of
spontaneous abortion. About 15% of all recognized pregnancies end in spontaneous abortion, and the incidence
of chromosome abnormalities in such abortions is greater
than 50%. Only 0.3% to 0.5% of all live-born infants have a
chromosome abnormality that is detectable with standard
microscopic karyotyping. Microdeletions and microduplications of DNA, not visible by routine chromosome karyotype analysis, are a major cause of human malformation
and mental retardation. A complementary analysis called
comparative genomic hybridization (CGH) or chromosomal microarray (CMA) can improve the diagnostic detection rate
of these small chromosomal abnormalities. The technology

Chapter 5

n

Clinical Genetics for the Dental Practitioner

91

Table 5-1
Common Chromosomal Aberrations
Type

Specific Alteration

Clinical Result

Aneuploidy

Trisomy 21
Trisomy 18
Trisomy 13
Extra X chromosomes

Down syndrome
Edwards syndrome
Patau syndrome
In females: XXX, XXXX, XXXXX syndromes
In males: Klinefelter syndrome—XXY, XXXY, and XXXXY
Usually nonviable
In females: Turner syndrome, 45, X
In males: nonviable, 45, Y
Translocation carrier (normal phenotype) or Down
syndrome
Variable
Cri du chat syndrome
Chronic myeloid leukemia

Monosomy, autosomal
Monosomy, X chromosome
Translocation

14/21, 21/21 or 21/22

Deletion

Ring chromosome
Short arm chromosome No. 5
Philadelphia chromosome (No. 22)

has advanced so that CMA is now the American College
of Medical Genetics and Genomics’ recommended first-tier
diagnostic test for individuals with multiple congenital
anomalies, developmental delay/intellectual disability, and
autism spectrum disorders.5 Although chromosomal microarray has been extensively shown to provide a higher
diagnostic yield than conventional cytogenetic methods,
some health insurers refuse to provide coverage for this test,
claiming that it is experimental and does not affect patients’
clinical management. In contrast to this claim, there are
data demonstrating the clinical utility of CMA.6

HEREDITARY TRAITS IN FAMILIES
Heritability is the proportion of the total phenotypic variance in a sample that is contributed by genetic variance.
On an individual basis for a binary trait (i.e., a disease or
trait that an individual either has or does not have), heritability is not the proportion of disease or the trait attributable to, or caused by, genetic factors. For a quantitative
trait, heritability is not a measure of the proportion of an
individual’s score attributable to genetic factors.7 A trait
with a heritability of 1 is said to be expressed without any
environmental influence, whereas a trait with a heritability
of 0.5 has half its variability (from individual to individual)
influenced by environmental factors and half by genotypic
factors. Values greater than 1 may occur because the methodology provides an estimate of heritability under several
simplifying assumptions that may be incorrect.
There is the common perception that knowing a trait’s
heritability will somehow affect how a patient should be
treated (e.g., for malocclusion) or that it will define the limits
of tooth movement or the manipulation of jaw growth. This
is not true. The ability of the patient to respond to changes
in the environment (including treatment), which has nothing to do with heritability, defines these limits. Heritability
estimates imply nothing about trait size or treatment limits based on a presumed genetic “predetermination.”8 Even
so, the estimation of heritability can provide an indication

of the relative importance of genetic factors on a trait in a
group at that time. Confirming that there is a certain degree
of genetic influence on a trait is a preliminary step to performing further specific genetic linkage studies (with DNA
markers) to determine areas of the genome that appear to be
associated with the characteristics of a given trait.
When hereditary traits in families are to be studied, it is
convenient to think of three classes of genetically influenced
traits: (1) monogenic, (2) polygenic, and (3) multifactorial.
Recently, the polygenic and multifactorial classes have often
been combined into what are referred to as complex traits
rather than Mendelian traits.9 Monogenic traits are produced and regulated by a single gene locus. Usually they
are relatively rare in the general population (occurrence in
fewer than 1 per 1000 individuals). However, if the appearance of an affected person is striking, there may be instant
recognition of the disease, as with patients having albinism,
achondroplasia, or neurofibromatosis. Monogenetic conditions often occur in families and show transmission characteristics of the Mendelian (dominant or recessive) traits.
Polygenic traits, too, are hereditary and typically exert influence over common characteristics such as height,
skin, and intelligence. This influence takes place through
many gene loci collectively asserting their regulation of
the trait. Although each gene involved has a minimal effect by itself, the effect of all the genes involved is additive. The associated phenotype is rarely discrete and
is most commonly continuous or quantitative. Because
these traits show a quantitative distribution of their phenotypes in a population, they do not show Mendelian inheritance patterns. It is important to note that the very
nature of their influence (multiple genes, each with a
small additive effect) dictates that their environment may
readily influence them. Monogenic traits are not readily
amenable to large-scale environmental modification, although there can be variations, presumably secondary to
other genetic and environmental factors. By contrast, one
can easily think of a dozen environmental factors known
to influence height and intelligence quotient.

92

Chapter 5

n

Clinical Genetics for the Dental Practitioner

Finally, multifactorial traits or conditions are influenced by multiple genes but differ significantly from
polygenic traits in that the influence is achieved through
an interaction of multiple genes and environmental factors and occurs when a liability threshold is exceeded. Although typically the number of genes involved is many,
occasionally a few genes, sometimes only two or three,
influence the trait. The effect of these genes on the phenotype is therefore a net effect, not necessarily a simple
additive one. Furthermore, phenotypic expression approaches that of a discrete Mendelian trait and therefore
cannot be readily classed as a quantitative trait. Likewise,
the effect of a gene influencing the phenotype may not
be as great as that of a gene associated with a monogenic
trait, but the gene may be referred to as having a major
effect. Among the well-known hereditary types of conditions designated as multifactorial are many of the severe
nonsyndromic congenital malformations such as cleft lip
and palate (CLP), neural tube defects such as spina bifida,
anencephaly, and hip dislocation. Multifactorial complex
inheritance is discussed later.
The investigation of human heritable traits usually
involves the observation of specific features in a family
and the study of that family’s pedigree. In a family, the
affected individual who first brings that family to the attention of the geneticist is called the proband or propositus.
This individual is the index case. Brothers and sisters of
the proband are siblings or sibs. Thus a sibship consists of
all the brothers and sisters in a nuclear family unit (parents and their offspring). The clinical appearance in an
individual of a given trait, such as eye color or height, is
that individual’s phenotype, whereas the specific genetic
makeup that influences or is associated with the phenotype is the genotype.
In an earlier section, the point is made that the human
chromosome complement has 22 homologous pairs of
autosomes and one pair of sex chromosomes. Because of
homologue pairing (excluding the X and Y chromosomes
in the male), there are at least two copies of each gene,
one located at the same position (locus) on each member
of the homologous pair. Genes at the same locus on a
pair of homologous chromosomes are alleles. When both
members of a pair of alleles are identical, the individual
is homozygous for that locus. When the two alleles at a
specific locus are different, the individual is heterozygous
for that locus.
A gene that results in the expression of a particular
phenotype in single dose (i.e., heterozygous) is a dominant gene. If the gene must be present in double dose
(homozygous) to express the phenotype, it is a recessive
gene. It is actually the phenotype that is dominant or recessive and not the gene itself. The terms dominant gene
and recessive gene, though, are commonly used to describe
these types of inherited traits in families.
Construction of a pedigree, which is a shorthand method of classifying the family data, conveniently summa­rizes
these data for the study of inherited traits. The symbols
used in constructing a pedigree are shown in Figure 5-4. The
observable inheritance patterns followed by such monogenic traits within families are determined by (1) whether
the trait is dominant or recessive, (2) whether the gene is

5

Male

Marriage

5 males

Consanguineous
marriage

Female
3

Illegitimacy

3 females

No issue

Sex unknown
8

•

Identical twins

Sex unknown, e.g.:
8 siblings

Fraternal twins

FR

Examined professionally;
affected with trait
Not examined professionally;
reported to have trait

•

Smaller symnbols:
Lived less than 1 day

Examined professionally;
normal for trait
P

Not examined; reported
normal for trait

Pregnancy
Stillbirth
Miscarriage

Adopted

EXAMPLE OF SYMBOL USE
(Marriage and Sibship)
•

•

FR

P

Figure 5-4 Pedigree symbols used in family studies.

autosomal (on one of the autosomes) or X-linked (on the
X chromosome), and (3) the chance distribution in the offspring of those genes passed from parents in their gametes
(sperm and ova). Pedigree construction is a valuable tool for
the clinician who is concerned with the diagnosis of and
counseling regarding hereditary traits. Every dentist should
be able to construct and interpret a pedigree because it is a
certainty that patients will come to the dentist’s office with
heritable oral diseases that must be diagnosed before treatment can begin.
The simple patterns of monogenic inheritance seen in
families are described in the following discussion. Because
all the Mendelian modes of inheritance are found in the
amelogenesis imperfecta (AI) disorders, these are used to
illustrate basic genetic principles.

DEVELOPMENTAL BIOLOGY OF ENAMEL
Tucker and Sharpe have provided a review of how molecular biologists are studying the genetic factors involved in
dental development.10 The two developmentally different
cell layers involved in dentinogenesis, inner enamel epithelium (enamel) and neural crest (dentin), are separated
by an extracellular matrix.11 Specific tooth development
is then mutually dependent on reciprocal cell-to-cell signaling between these two developmentally different cell
layers.12 The genes involved in the development of these

Chapter 5

tissues are candidates for DNA mutation analysis, especially if they are in a chromosome location that has been
associated with or linked to an inherited defect of enamel
or dentin. The most intriguing dental research today is
focused on (1) the attempt to localize the genes for these
proteins to specific loci and (2) the biochemical identification of a specific defect in the protein that prevents it
from functioning normally. The following is a discussion
of genetic principles best exemplified by the heritable
disorders of enamel. (Further discussion of the molecular
basis of the heritable disorders of dentin and enamel appears in Chapter 3.)
Based on clinical appearance, radiographic characteristics, and microscopic features, oral pathologists have
recognized three major types of inherited enamel defects:
hypoplasia, hypocalcification, and hypomaturation.
These terms also provide the general description of the
disease phenotypes. For example, in type 1, enamel hypoplasia, the enamel is hard and well calcified but defective in amount, so the teeth appear small. Two types of
deficient enamel phenotypes are seen: generalized (all the
enamel) and localized (pits and grooves in specific areas).
Type 2, hypocalcification disorders, are those in which
the enamel matrix is so drastically altered that normal
calcification cannot occur, with the result that the clinical
phenotype is soft, mushy enamel that easily wears away.
Type 3 defect, hypomaturation, involves the process of
maturation of the enamel crystal. This occurs after an
essentially normal enamel matrix has been established.
The enamel is of normal thickness (not hypoplastic) and
relatively normal hardness (slightly hypocalcified) with
reduced radiographic density and discoloration.
From this collection of enamel diseases we can now
select four examples of AI that illustrate the four major Mendelian modes of inheritance: autosomal dominant (AD), autosomal recessive (AR), X-linked dominant
(XLD), and X-linked recessive (XLR).
One characteristic of inherited dental defects is that
both dentitions (primary and permanent) are affected.
Occasionally the defect is expressed differently in the two
dentitions, as in the case of dentin dysplasia type II.13
However, it is much more common to see the same clinical and radiographic picture in both dentitions. Both dentitions are affected in AI disorders.

AUTOSOMAL-DOMINANT INHERITANCE
From pedigrees such as that shown in Figure 5-5, the following criteria for AD inheritance may be deduced:
  
1.	The phenotype occurs in successive generations, that
is, it shows vertical inheritance.
2.	On average, 50% of the offspring of an affected parent
will also be affected.
3.	Normal parents have normal offspring. The following
causes of exceptions to this rule are worth noting:
•	Nonpenetrance of the trait (defined later).
•	A mutation in either the sperm or egg.
•	Germinal mosaicism. This is an increasingly invoked
explanation for this situation. In this case, one of the
parents is mosaic in the germ cell line, and the sperm
or eggs are of two types—one cell line with and one

n

Clinical Genetics for the Dental Practitioner

93

2

Normal male, female
Affected male, female

2
2

Figure 5-5 Autosomal-dominant inheritance in hypocalcified

amelogenesis imperfecta.

cell line without the mutation. Chance determines
which sperm cell line will be selected. However, as
the molecular basis of genetic traits becomes evident,
mutation analysis may show that a parent believed
to be unaffected may actually also have the somatic
mutation found in affected children.
•	Nonpaternity. Although this is not strictly a genetic
problem, the illegitimacy rate in the U.S. population is high enough to make this a likely explanation
when a normal couple has a child affected with a
completely penetrant dominant trait.
4.	Males and females are equally likely to be affected.
  
The hypocalcification type of AI provides an excellent
example of AD inheritance. For diagnosis of this trait, several criteria are used. First, enamel matrix is susceptible to
abrasion. The clinical picture is typical—gross accumulation of plaque on teeth that are hypersensitive because of
the exposed dentin. Second, radiographs show enamel of
various interproximal thicknesses but with a Swiss cheese
appearance because of loss of mineral. Thus severe abrasion of this soft enamel is common.

AUTOSOMAL-RECESSIVE INHERITANCE
Recessively inherited traits require that both genes of a
given pair at a single locus code for defective proteins.
Thus, of the two alleles at this genetic locus for AI, both
must be mutants to show the trait. The following three
gene pairs are recognized: AA, normal; Aa, heterozygote,
showing an unaffected phenotype; and aa, homozygous,
affected phenotype. The most common genetic situation
producing an affected child is that in which both parents
are heterozygous at this genetic locus (Fig. 5-6).
The following significant points about recessive inheritance
   must be noted:
1.	The concept of a gene carrier is used here. The carrier is heterozygous for a recessive gene, and this
single gene has only subtle, if any, expression. Parents of an affected child are typically heterozygous
(carriers) and are then interpreted as being normal.
Sometimes the carrier state can be detected, as in
the case of phenylketonuria or Tay-Sachs disease. In
these conditions a test is available for carrier identification to detect the presence of the single mutant
gene. This greatly improves the precision of genetic
counseling.

94

Chapter 5

n

Clinical Genetics for the Dental Practitioner

2.	The rarer the recessive gene, the more likely it is that
normal parents who have an affected child will be
blood relatives. This is consanguineous mating. Given
that both parents who produce an AR-affected child
are heterozygotes, it is easy to see that only one of the
four possible combinations of parents’ genes results in
the homozygous-affected genotype. Hence, the recurrence risk for an affected child in this case is 25%.
Note that transmission of the phenotype in a pedigree
is horizontal (typically present only in sibs) and not
vertical as with a dominant trait.
  
Of several AR types of AI, the one chosen for discussion here is the pigmented hypomaturation form. In this
instance, the genetic defect probably lies in the protein
needed in late tooth development to produce mature,
hard, and dense enamel. The defective enamel present
is softer than normal but not nearly as soft and easily
abraded as in the hypocalcification defect. Remarkably, a
brown pigment is found in these outer layers of enamel
that are formed last, imparting a dark brown, unsightly
appearance that necessitates restorative treatment. A pedigree illustrating AR inheritance of this hypomaturation
defect is shown in Figure 5-6.

X-LINKED OR SEX-LINKED INHERITANCE
Genes on the sex chromosomes are unequally distributed
to males and females. This inequality is the result of the
following facts: (1) males have one X and one Y chromosome, whereas females have two X chromosomes; and (2)
the genes active on the Y chromosome are essentially concerned with the development of the male reproductive
system. For these reasons, then, males are hemizygous for
X-linked genes, meaning that they have only half (or one
each) of the X-linked genes. Because females have two X
chromosomes, they may be either homozygous or heterozygous for X-linked genes, just as with autosomal genes.
Interesting genetic combinations are made possible by
the male hemizygous condition. Because only one gene
locus of each kind in the X chromosome is represented in
the male, all recessive genes in single dose express themselves phenotypically and thereby behave as though they
were dominant genes. Conversely, XLR genes must be
present in double dose (homozygous) in females to fully
express themselves. Consequently, full expression of rare
XLR diseases in practice is restricted to males and is seen
infrequently in females.
To this point we have considered heritable defects in
two of the three major types of enamel disorders. The
third type—AI, hypoplastic type—shows both autosomal
and X-linked modes of inheritance, but only one X-linked
type is described here.

X-LINKED DOMINANT

Normal male, female
Affected female

2

Figure 5-6 Autosomal-recessive inheritance in pigmented

amelogenesis imperfecta.

Figure 5-7 is the pedigree of a family with an XLD form of
AI, hypoplastic type.14 The clinical features are diagnostic
and in some females can be quite striking.
Once again, both dentitions are affected similarly.
The surface defect has been described as being granular, lobular, or even pitted. Conceivably, all these different forms of expression are the result of the action of
a single gene (or at least its alleles). The enamel is hard
but because of its thinness is more susceptible to fracture
and abnormal wear. Under the appropriate conditions,
this trait resembles a hypocalcification defect. However,
radiographs quickly resolve this diagnostic problem and
show enamel of normal density but with greatly reduced
thickness.

Normal male, female
Affected male, female

2
2

Figure 5-7 X-linked dominant inheritance in hypoplastic amelogenesis imperfecta.

Chapter 5

X-LINKED RECESSIVE
A pedigree of a family with the X-linked recessive form of
enamel hypomaturation is shown in Figure 5-8. The genetic criteria for diagnosing an XLR trait are summarized as
follows:
  
1.	Because the gene cannot be passed from father to son,
affected fathers almost never have affected sons. A
son could be affected if the mother is a carrier of the
XLR trait.
2.	All daughters of an affected male receive his X-linked
genes. Therefore, affected males transmit the trait
to their grandsons if they are affected through their
daughters.
3.	The incidence of the trait is much higher in males
than in females. This is typified by the disease hemophilia, which is also caused by an XLR gene.
  
The clinical features of XLR hypomaturation-type AI
are most striking. The enamel has a somewhat reduced
hardness but is not soft. However, the crowns of the
teeth look like mountains with snow on them; hence the
name “snow-capped teeth.” Radiologically, the enamel is hypomature; it shows a lack of contrast between
enamel and dentin even though the enamel is of normal
thickness.
It should be noted that heterozygous females occasionally show significant clinical expression of a single
XLR gene. The reason for this apparent contradiction is
the process of X inactivation, termed lyonization, after
geneticist Mary Lyon. This occurs only in females. All
normal female cells have two X chromosomes, but most
of the genes on one of the two X chromosomes are inactivated at approximately the blastula stage of development. This has the effect of making the total number of
active, X-linked genes about the same in both males and
females. If the female is heterozygous for an X-linked
trait, two populations of cells result. One cell population has genes on one X chromosome that are active,
while the other cell population has genes on the other
X chromosome that are active. When by chance the X
chromosome with the deleterious gene is active in a significant proportion of the cells, its expression may be

2
Normal male, female
Affected male
Gene carrier female

2

Figure 5-8 X-linked recessive inheritance in hypomaturation

amelogenesis imperfecta.

n

Clinical Genetics for the Dental Practitioner

95

observed in that female. Chance dictates that this imbalance does not occur frequently, but because all females
are, by definition of lyonization, mosaic with regard to
X-linked traits, phenotypic expression of heterozygous
genes may occur in them.
The previous statements concerning the distribution of XLR genes in males and females apply equally
as well to XLD genes. The principal difference lies in
the fact that when the gene is dominant, more females
than males will show the trait (see pedigree in Fig. 5-8).
Because all XLR genes behave as dominant genes in
males, no new criteria are made for their inheritance in
males. The following criteria distinguish an XLD trait
in
families:
  
1.	Affected males must transmit the trait to all of their
daughters (as with XLR traits), and all of them are
affected because fathers give their X chromosome to
their daughters and their Y chromosome to their sons.
2.	Affected males cannot transmit the trait to their sons
(just as with XLR traits).
3.	Heterozygous females transmit the trait to, on average, 50% of their children of both genders, whereas
homozygous-affected females will have only affected
children. The latter situation is exceptionally rare for
a dominant trait and is practically never observed.
Thus all females affected with a dominantly inherited
X-linked trait are considered to be heterozygotes until
proven otherwise.
  
Two points are emphasized here. First, transmission
of XLD genes by females follows a pattern indistinguishable from that of autosomal transmission. Thus these two
types of dominant inheritance can be differentiated only
by observation of the offspring of affected males. Second,
it was noted that XLR disorders are much less common in
females than in males. The reverse is true for XLD traits.
An XLD trait should appear about twice as often in females as in males because females have twice as many X
chromosomes as males.

Amelogenesis Imperfecta and Nephrocalcinosis
Syndrome
Although amelogenesis imperfecta usually occurs as an
isolated trait and not as part of a syndrome, many syndromes include amelogenesis imperfecta as part of their
pattern of anomalies.15 One that is rare, but of clinical importance due to its potential medical significance, is amelogenesis imperfecta with nephrocalcinosis, also called
enamel-renal syndrome. This AR condition is caused by
mutations in the FAM20A gene. In addition to the hypoplastic enamel, other dental findings include pulp stones,
delayed or failed eruption of secondary dentition, and
gingival overgrowth. Since nephrocalcinosis is often asymptomatic and can be associated with impaired renal
function, dentists who see children with generalized and
thin hypoplastic amelogenesis imperfecta should consider
referral to a nephrologist for a renal ultrasound scan. Likewise, children and adults with nephrocalcinosis should be
referred to a dentist.16 Follow-up may be indicated since
blood chemistry analyses are typically normal, and the
nephrocalcinosis may not appear on renal ultrasound until later in life.17

96

Chapter 5

n

Clinical Genetics for the Dental Practitioner

VARIATION IN GENE EXPRESSION
The patterns of inheritance shown in traits determined
by genes at a single locus are usually easy to recognize.
However, many factors may modify the expression of a
gene in a family in such a way that a typical monogenic
pattern of inheritance is not discernible. Two concepts related to modification of gene action are discussed here:
penetrance and expressivity.

PENETRANCE
When a person with a given genotype fails to demonstrate the phenotype characteristic for the genotype, the
gene is said to show reduced penetrance. This is a situation most commonly seen with dominant traits. Dentinogenesis imperfecta, an AD trait, is practically 100%
penetrant because all individuals who carry that gene
show its phenotype. Conversely, osteogenesis imperfecta
shows incomplete penetrance because pedigree studies
demonstrate individuals who must carry the gene but
who do not appear to be affected. Another relevant example is found in the CLP trait. Consider the following
family history: a grandfather and his grandson both have
CLP but the boy’s mother (also the grandfather’s daughter) does not. The probability is very high that her son’s
cleft liability came from his grandfather and therefore was
passed through the mother without being expressed as an
overt cleft. Possibly the subtle action or predisposition of
a clefting gene or genes may be found in measurements
of facial structures, or variation in other structures such as
the orbicularis oris muscle may be identified. This could
increase the power of linkage analysis of the predisposing genotype. With the spectacular advances in the understanding of the human genome, we may be able to
locate a gene that regulates clefting before its action at
the molecular level is known or shows this action as a
clinical trait.

EXPRESSIVITY
If a single gene trait can show different phenotypes in the
affected members of kindred, it shows variable expressivity. Osteogenesis imperfecta also provides an illustration
of variable gene expression. The cardinal signs of this disease are (1) multiple fractures, (2) blue sclera, (3) dentinogenesis imperfecta, and (4) otosclerosis, which results in
a hearing deficit. Affected persons in a single family may
show any one or a combination of these signs, which illustrates the considerable variation in gene expression.
The minimum expression of the gene observed in a family might then be only a blue color to the sclera, which
could be unnoticed by the clinician. In this case, highly
variable gene expression may fade into nonpenetrance.
The craniosynostosis syndromes are AD traits associated with single gene mutations. They also provide
good examples of how, even with the strong influence
of a single gene, the phenotype can vary markedly. Although it was once thought that a particular mutation in
a given gene would always result in a specific syndrome,
several identical mutations in the fibroblast growth factor
receptor 2 (FGFR2) gene have been found in patients diagnosed with the three different clinical craniosynostosis

syndrome entities of Crouzon, Pfeiffer, and Jackson-Weiss
syndrome.18,19
Another example of the individual variability of these
single-gene-mutation AD phenotypes occurred when two
individuals in the same family had the classic phenotypes
of Pfeiffer and Apert syndromes. In addition, seven other
family members had unusually shaped heads and facial
appearance reminiscent of Crouzon syndrome.20 The
phenotype may be so variable that the individual may
appear to be clinically normal, yet have the same gene
mutation associated with Crouzon syndrome in three of
his children and two of his grandchildren. Only through
the analysis of radiographic measurements was a minimal
expression of features suggestive of Crouzon syndrome
evident.21

EPIGENETICS
The influence of one or more modifying genes through
their protein products in reducing or enhancing the effect of another gene has been referred to as epigenetics, but
is now commonly referred to as epistasis. Epigenetics now
refers to changes in gene expression that are inherited but
not caused by alteration in the sequence of the gene. Examples of epigenetics include gene expression that is altered by methylation or acetylation, and by inhibition of
messenger RNA expression by interfering RNA or micro­
RNA binding.22 Although monozygotic (identical) twins
are epigenetically indistinguishable during the early years
of life, older monozygous twins exhibit remarkable differences in their overall content and genomic distribution of 5-methylcytosine DNA and histone acetylation,
which can create differences in gene expression between
the twin pairs.23 These epigenetic factors can help explain
the relationship between an individual’s genetic background, the environment, aging, and disease. It can do
so because the epigenetic state varies among tissues and
during a lifetime, whereas the DNA sequence remains essentially the same. As cells adapt to a changing internal
and external environment, epigenetic mechanisms can
“remember” these changes in the normal programming
and reprogramming of gene activity.24 This is leading to a
new way of thinking about how the genome and environment interact, with a tremendous impact on the study of
developmental biology, cancer, and other diseases.

MULTIFACTORIAL INHERITANCE
The following features typify multifactorial inheritance
in contrast to monogenic inheritance: (1) multiple genes
(polygenes) at different loci are involved in expressing
the phenotype, and (2) the phenotype produced is a summation of the effects of polygenes interacting with their
environment. The phenotypic result is often a continuously varying spectrum of that trait (e.g., height) rather
than presentation as a discrete (trait present or absent)
phenotype.
Many common diseases, such as dental caries, have continuous variation with no sharp distinction between normal (average) and abnormal (extremes). However, there
may be a specific measurement point beyond which that
disease is arbitrarily regarded by the clinician as abnormal.

Chapter 5

97

there is a definite familial tendency. This is shown by the
fact that the proportion of affected near-relatives is greater than the incidence in the general population. However, this proportion is much lower than that expected for
a monogenic trait, and the explanation most commonly
offered for major congenital malformations is that they
are multifactorial traits. As previously stated, one definition of a complex trait is that it represents the summation
of the effects of many genes (polygenes) interacting with
the environment, which is why it has also been termed
multifactorial. Environment is defined as those nongenetic circumstances that render an individual more or
less susceptible to a disease state. In contrast to so-called
simple monogenic traits, whose characteristics have been
summarized in preceding paragraphs, multifactorial complex
  diseases show the following characteristics:
1.	Each person has a liability for a given disease, and
that liability represents a sum of the genetic and
environmental liabilities.
2.	The multifactorial-threshold model is a mathematical way of expressing these liabilities. For polygenic
traits, the model is simply a gaussian curve. As already
­noted, for multifactorial traits, a threshold must be
added to allow the continuous polygenic model to
be used in describing noncontinuous or discrete
traits. For many human congenital malformations, a
multifactorial model with threshold is appropriate for
describing discrete traits such as CLP. Such a threshold means that all persons with sufficient gene dosage
and environmental interaction will be above the
threshold of expression and show the cleft lip. Those
with less will not show a cleft lip. A graphic representation of this idea is shown in Figure 5-9.
3.	Because of the different dosages of polygenes in
groups that show a specific phenotype (e.g., CLP),
the overall incidence of this trait will vary in nearrelatives of those affected. For example, a dominantly
inherited trait has a gene dosage of 1 in 2 (50%).
Assuming that several polygenes may be involved in
CLP, this figure decreases at least tenfold to about 1%
to 5%. The incidence in a random population is even
lower—about 1 per 1000. Therefore, increasing gene
dosage for a multifactorial complex trait in a family is
associated with an increased incidence of that trait in
Threshold

MULTIFACTORIAL (COMPLEX) INHERITANCE
IN HUMAN DISEASES
For many common disorders, such as diabetes and hypertension, and even for the major common congenital malformations (i.e., spina bifida, hydrocephalus, and CLP),

Clinical Genetics for the Dental Practitioner

Frequency

Multifactorial inheritance is troublesome to analyze
genetically; in fact, geneticists often arrive at a diagnosis
of multifactorial inheritance for a given trait only after the
monogenic forms of inheritance have been considered
and found to be unlikely. Certain techniques for studying it have been developed. The simplest is the method
of resemblance between relatives, which states that the
more closely related two individuals are, the more closely
they resemble each other concerning the specific trait in
question. It is important to stress, though, the continuous
phenotypic variation that is characteristic of inheritance
patterns resulting from polygenes.
This issue of continuous variation is emphasized because the most common diseases with which the dentist
must deal (i.e., periodontal disease, dental caries, and
malocclusion) are multifactorial traits. Only the extremes
of variation are readily apparent to the dentist, such as in
the child with rampant caries or the adult who is cariesfree. In this latter instance, if one did not understand the
concept of multifactorial inheritance, one might conclude that such individuals represent a discrete phenotype influenced by a single gene in a Mendelian manner.
This is frequently not the case.
A most important feature of traits produced by polygenes is that they are susceptible to environmental modification. A phenotype resulting from the concerted action
of 100 genes is much more likely to be altered and modified by the existing environment than a trait controlled
by only one or even several genes. Even so, this does not
mean that a trait resulting from only one or even several
genes cannot be influenced by environmental factors.
The change in phenotype depends on the individual’s
ability to respond to the environmental factor, which
may be heavily influenced by the same gene(s) originally
influencing the phenotype or by other genes.
An example of a polygenic trait that is markedly influenced by environmental factors is dental caries, which is
the interaction product of three essential factors: a cariogenic diet, a caries-producing bacterial flora, and a susceptible tooth. These three factors encompass a variety of
biologically complicated entities, such as saliva, plaque,
tooth matrix formation, and crystallization. It should be
easy to see that the development of these complex elements must involve a great many genes. Environmental
modification, such as properly timed systemic fluoride
supplementation, produces a considerable alteration in
the phenotype without changing the genetic constitution
of the individual. The reader can probably think of additional environmental modifications that can produce a
greatly altered dental caries experience without changing
an individual’s genes. Some conditions that are attributed
to a multifactorial inheritance because they tend to occur
in particular families may be greatly influenced by a gene
or genes that predispose to the condition, depending on
the other genetic or environmental factors involved.

n

Total liability (genetic and environment)
Unaffected
Affected

Figure 5-9 Multifactorial model for inheritance of cleft lip

and palate.

98

Chapter 5

n

Clinical Genetics for the Dental Practitioner

near-relatives of the affected individuals. The nature
of this system with a threshold permits large numbers
of persons at risk for showing that phenotype (CLP)
to carry the liability for clefting without expressing it
clinically. Based on current research findings regarding traits that are multifactorial with a threshold, it
appears that it will be difficult to relate these mathematical observations to cellular biological function.
  
Toward the end of the nineteenth century, Galton
recognized that twins could be useful for evaluating the
nature-nurture argument that was raging at that time. Interest in the twin method for study of the relative importance of heredity and environment in humans has been
increasing. One explanation for this interest is that many
human traits are complex and susceptible to environmental modification, and are therefore difficult to study
by conventional methods. The twin method allows such
traits to be studied based on the principle that human
twins are of two basic types: monozygotic (or identical)
twins, resulting from a single ovum fertilized by a single
sperm, and dizygotic (or fraternal) twins, resulting from
fertilization of two ova by two sperms. It is axiomatic that
monozygotic twins have identical genotypes, whereas dizygotic twins are no more closely related to each other
than are any two siblings. It also follows that differences
between monozygotic twins result from environmental
differences (although, as previously mentioned, epigenetics
could be a factor), whereas those between dizygotic
twins result from differences in both heredity and
­environment.
To use the twin method, one must distinguish between
the two types of zygosity. If both twins are identical for
the trait in question (regardless of their zygosity), they
are described as concordant. If they are unlike for the trait,
they are discordant. Such intrapair differences are usually
expressed in percentage figures for a group of twins being
evaluated. For example, monozygous twins show a 33%
concordance for CLP, whereas dizygous twins show only
a 5% concordance.
Another method to estimate the heritability of a trait
and to evaluate evidence of linkage of a phenotype with
DNA polymorphisms is by sib-pair analysis. Heritability
estimates can be generated from within- and betweensibship variance quantified by generalized linear models,
with confounding factors controlled for where indicated.
Polymorphic DNA markers may be tested for genetic linkage (proximity) to a gene influencing a particular phenotype by testing whether the magnitude of the phenotypic
difference between two siblings is correlated with the alleles they share that are identical by descent (IBD). An
allele is considered to be IBD if both members of a sibling
pair inherited the same marker allele from the same parent. If a marker is linked to a gene contributing to the
phenotype in question, then siblings with a similar (if
quantitative) or the same (if discrete) phenotype would be
expected to share more alleles IBD, whereas siblings with
widely differing phenotypes would be expected to share
few if any alleles IBD near any gene(s) influencing the
phenotype.25 In addition, another method of looking for
DNA markers is by linkage disequilibrium or association
analysis. In its simplest terms, this refers to a nonrandom

association of alleles at two or more loci. It was found
that some sections of DNA do not tend to change through
generations, in what are called haplotype blocks. Because
of this, testing one SNP within each block for significant
association with a disease or trait is possible when an influencing locus for that disease or trait is located in or at
least close to that haplotype block.26 Partly because these
haplotype blocks occur in populations, these analyses can
be performed on unrelated individuals (affected and controls), as opposed to linkage analyses.
However, if the control individuals are from a different
genetic background than the affected individuals, there
may be a bias. One way to deal with that problem is to use
the quantitative transmission disequilibrium test. This
analysis calculates the difference between the value of the
quantitative trait in the offspring and the average value of
the quantitative trait in all offspring in all families studied, while simultaneously considering the allele transmission from parent to offspring.27 Thus, whereas the sib-pair
linkage analysis involves two or more siblings, the quantitative transmission disequilibrium test involves trios of
parents and one or more siblings.

INFLUENCE OF GENETIC FACTORS ON
MAJOR CRANIOFACIAL, ORAL, AND
DENTAL CONDITIONS
GENETICS AND DENTAL CARIES
It is clear from many dietary studies that variation in
susceptibility to dental caries exists even under identical, controlled conditions. This implies that, because of
genetic differences, certain environmental factors are potentially more cariogenic for some people than for others.
This is not to say that dental caries is an inherited disease;
rather, genetic influences may modify the overt expression of this disease in the individual.
Fifty years ago, dental caries was presented to dental
students as a disease that was so common that more than
99% of the general population was afflicted with it. Although it is still recognized as a common disease, the use
of systemic and topical fluorides and persistence by organized dentistry to bring about changes in dietary habits
and oral hygiene practices have contributed significantly
to a remarkable decrease in the prevalence of this disorder, especially noted in children. Currently, it is not unusual for a prepubertal child to be caries-free. However,
there are individual variations in caries that are not fully
explained by hygiene or fluoride exposure.
Three essential interacting elements comprise the model system for dental caries that is most commonly used
to discuss its etiology: microorganisms, substrate (fermentable carbohydrates), and host factors such as tooth
anatomy. It is in the last area—host factors—that genetics
exerts a major influence on dental caries initiation.
Several investigators have studied the genetic aspects
of dental caries in humans, using both twin and family pedigree approaches. Because dental caries is an agedependent process, much of the reported data cannot
be compared because of age differences in the various

Chapter 5

population groups studied. Nevertheless, the family observations by Klein and Palmer28 and Klein29 are worth
noting. Their findings indicated that children have a caries experience remarkably similar to that of their parents
when the susceptibility of both parents is the same (either high or low). However, when caries susceptibility of
the two parents is dissimilar, the children’s susceptibility
tends to be more like that of the mother than that of the
father. This finding was particularly evident in daughters.
Because dental caries is an infectious communicable
disease, however, familial clustering may, to some degree,
reflect familial environmental contact, with transmission
of cariogenic bacteria to children at certain ages. Li and
Caufield found that mothers are the principal source of
mutans streptococci in their infants, with a greater rate of
transmission to female than male infants.30 In addition,
the association of maternal salivary bacterial challenge
(mutans streptococci and lactobacilli) from pregnancy
through 24 months postpartum is associated with not
only oral infection among children but also their caries
incidence (≥1 cavitated or restored teeth) at 36 months.31
The more common a genetic trait is, the more difficult
it is to demonstrate its genetic character. Several authors
have attempted to do this for dental caries by the study
of twins. Book and Grahnen attempted to maximize differences in caries experience within families by selecting
caries-free 20-year-old men and comparing caries experience within their families.32 Results showed that parents
and siblings of caries-free propositi had significantly lower rates of decayed, missing, and filled teeth than did the
control families. The authors concluded that the observed
differences are hereditary and probably polygenic.
Studies of twins conducted by Dahlberg and Dahlberg,33 Mansbridge,34 Horowitz and colleagues,35 Caldwell
and Finn,36 and Bretz and colleagues37 indicated that genetic factors make a significant contribution to individual
differences in caries susceptibility. However, most authors
agree that this genetic component of dental caries is overshadowed by the overall effect of environmental factors
in most individuals. Although it appears that genetic factors significantly contribute to the colonization of specific
oral bacteria,38 or to the levels of Streptococcus mutans specifically,39 the conclusion from clinical twin and familial correlation studies and estimations from heritability
studies regarding the degree of genetic influence on caries
may be confounded by familial factors such as oral hygiene habits, diet, and the already-mentioned transmission of cariogenic bacteria within the family.
The foundation for seeking different individual susceptibilities to caries is based on animal studies. Hunt and
colleagues succeeded in establishing caries-resistant and
caries-susceptible strains of rats using inbreeding techniques.48 Although the resistant strain was challenged
by oral inoculation of cariogenic bacteria, the resistant
phenotype was maintained. These were the first studies to
confirm the presence of important genetic elements influencing dental caries susceptibility.
A review of inherited risks for susceptibility to caries
found evidence of an association between altered dental
enamel development in defined populations and an increased risk of caries, as well as a relationship between host

n

Clinical Genetics for the Dental Practitioner

99

immune complex genes and different levels of cariogenic
bacteria and enamel defects.40 This is further supported by
the finding of a significant interaction between tuftelin
SNP genotypes and S. mutans levels,41 and by variation in
the amelogenin gene and caries susceptibility.42 Thus the
individual’s genotype may influence the likelihood of intraoral colonization of cariogenic bacteria, which further
exemplifies the complexity of caries development. Genetics studies on well-characterized populations with clearly
defined caries experience will help define those host factors
with the greatest influence on the incidence of caries.32
For example, GWAS for dental caries focused on the
primary dentition in children aged 3 to 12 years old
and implicated several novel genes: ACTN2, EDARADD,
EPHA7, LPO, MPPED2, MTR, and ZMPSTE24. Subsequent investigation has corroborated the influence of
the MPPED2 and ACTN2 genes on caries risk. The role of
ACTN2 in organizing ameloblasts during amelogenesis
supports the hypothesis of its involvement in caries risk,
although the functional role of MPPED2 in caries is currently unknown.43 The enamelin gene (ENAM) has also
been implicated as a factor in caries susceptibility.44 An
indication that different genes may influence caries activities across the surfaces of the permanent dentition
was found by a GWAS suggesting BCOR and INHBA to
be factors in pit-and-fissure caries, while BCORL1, CXCR1,
and CXCR2 are factors in smooth-surface caries.45,46 Further studies to define the genes involved, which may be
related, for example, to salivary flow, plaque formation,
and diet preferences, are in progress. Bretz and colleagues
found that genetic factors contributed independently to
both dental caries and sucrose sweetness preference,47 although it is likely that an increased preference for sweets
would affect the caries rate.
In summary, susceptibility to human dental caries is
influenced to a significant but variable degree by genetic
factors in most individuals. This genetic influence control is undoubtedly complex and strongly implies considerable environmental influence. However, there are
likely individuals in whom the genetic susceptibility is
markedly greater than that in most of the population.
Specific types of dental caries susceptibility representing
the extreme variations of this trait may ultimately prove
to be monogenic or major gene traits, but at present
the evidence is insufficient for a clear statement of such
inheritance.

GENETICS AND PERIODONTAL DISEASE
The periodontal disease state is often described as a local
inflammatory disease with possible underlying systemic
factors. This disease is so widespread in human populations and has such widely varying clinicohistopathologic
features that it seems certain that multiple diseases with
multiple causes are being lumped together as a single entity. Periodontists suggest that there is evidence for the
existence of several variant types of periodontal disease,
generally subclassified by the age of onset, severity of
bone loss, oral hygiene status, and the presence or absence of local factors. One might visualize a continuum
of disease expression ranging from localized gingivitis to

100

Chapter 5

n

Clinical Genetics for the Dental Practitioner

generalized periodontitis with severe bone and tooth loss.
Such a complex disease shows both inflammatory and degenerative pathologic features.
It is easy to understand why genetics studies of this
common problem have been neglected. As is true for dental caries, periodontal disease is common; occurs with a
continuum of expressivity; and is greatly influenced by
environmental conditions, such as diet, occlusion, and
oral hygiene habits. All of these features fit the description of a complex type of disease or at least of disease
susceptibility.
Most genetics studies of a trait make use of families with
multiple affected individuals or twins. A carefully designed
study of twins with periodontal disease was reported by
Ciancio and colleagues in 1969.49 Using the Ramfjord
index, which evaluates gingival inflammation, calculus
formation, tooth mobility, and tooth loss in all four quadrants of the mouth, the authors examined seven monozygotic and 12 dizygotic pairs of teenaged twins. They
concluded that there was no evidence in these twins for
significant heritability of any of these dental parameters.
Alternatively, Michalowicz and colleagues published a
large study (63 monozygotic and 33 dizygotic pairs) of
adult twins (mean age, 40 years).50 Using elements of the
Ramfjord index as criteria for diagnosis, they calculated
heritability estimates. The authors state that from 38% to
82% of the periodontal disease identified in these twins
was attributable to genetic factors.
Investigation by Kornman and colleagues into the
association of different polymorphisms of inflammationmediating genes and periodontal disease in adult nonsmokers indicated that interleukin 1α and 1β (IL-1α and
IL-1β) genotypes may be a risk factor.51 The IL-1β polymorphism was IL-1β + 3953 and the IL-1α polymorphism
was IL-1α -889. Nonsmokers aged 40 to 60 carrying the
“2” allele (in either the homozygous or the heterozygous
state) at both loci were observed to have nearly 19 times
the risk of developing severe periodontitis as did those
homozygous for the “1” allele at either or both of these
loci. However, this association has been seen in other,53
but not all, populations.52-55 Greenstein and Hart noted
that the relationship of specific IL-1 genotypes and the
level of crevicular fluid IL-1β is not clear, and that the
ability of the genetic susceptibility test for severe chronic
periodontitis, based on the findings of Kornman and colleagues, to forecast which patients will develop increased
bleeding on probing, periodontitis, loss of teeth, or need
for dental implants is ambiguous.56 This illustrates the
complexity of genetic association studies, and genetic
counseling is based on a marker that accounts for only a
portion of phenotypic variations.
A genome-wide scan for chronic periodontitis found
suggestive evidence of association for six genes, including NIN, NPY, and WNT5A for severe chronic periodontitis, and NCR2, EMR1, and chromosome location 10p15
for moderate chronic periodontitis. Inclusion of smoking
data along with the genetic analysis increased the heritable variance in severe chronic periodontitis from 18% to
52%, confirming smoking as an environmental causative
factor that may act in addition to inherited susceptibility
genes.57

Early-onset periodontitis has been the subject of most
family studies. Because several forms of early-onset periodontitis (e.g., localized prepubertal periodontitis, localized juvenile periodontitis [JP], and generalized JP) can be
found in the same family, the expression of the underlying genetic etiology appears to have the potential to be
influenced by other genetic factors.58
Progress has been made in the study of rare genetic conditions or syndromes that can predispose to periodontal
disease or have periodontal disease as a relatively consistent component of their pleiotropic effect. For example,
leukocyte adhesion deficiency (LAD), type I and type II,
are AR disorders of the leukocyte adhesion cascade.59 LAD
type I has abnormalities in the integrin receptors of leukocytes resulting from mutations in the β2 integrin chain
(ITGβ2) gene, leading to impaired adhesion and chemotaxis, which result in increased susceptibility for severe
infections and early-onset (prepubertal) periodontitis.60,61
LAD type II is also an AR disorder secondary to mutation
in the SLC35C1 gene encoding a GDP-fucose transmembrane transporter (FucT1) located in the Golgi apparatus.
The infectious episodes and the severity are much milder
than those observed in LAD type I, and the only persistent
clinical symptom is chronic severe periodontitis. The exact
defect in the system is absence of the sialyl Lewis x (SleX)
structure antigens, which are important ligands for selectin
on the leukocyte, which leads to a profound defect in leukocyte rolling, the first step in the adhesion cascade. This
causes a marked decrease in chemotaxis, accompanied by
pronounced neutrophilia. Apart from the leukocyte defect,
these patients suffer from severe growth and mental retardation and exhibit the rare Bombay blood group type.59
Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (EDS) is a collection of 10
types distinguished on the basis of clinical symptoms
and inheritance patterns. In addition to consistent earlyonset periodontal disease, patients with EDS type VIII
have variable hyperextensibility of the skin, ecchymotic
pretibial lesions, minimal bruising, minimal to moderate
joint hypermobility of the digits, and “cigarette paper”
scars. Inheritance is AD. Early-onset periodontal disease
may also be found in patients with EDS type IV. These
individuals are usually characterized by type III collagen
abnormalities with hyperextensibility of the skin, ecchymotic pretibial lesions, easy bruisability, cigarette paper
scars, joint hypermobility of digits, pes planus, and, of
greatest concern, arterial and intestinal ruptures. Individuals with type IV, like those with type VIII, also have
AD inheritance.62 The presence or absence of type III collagen abnormalities has been taken to be a differentiating
factor between the two types, with EDS type IV showing
abnormal type III collagen. The considerable overlap in
phenotype of these two types warrants careful family and
clinical evaluation, and biochemical studies of collagen
when a patient with features of EDS and periodontal disease is evaluated.63
Chédiak-Higashi syndrome has frequently been linked
with severe periodontitis. This rare AR disorder is characterized by oculocutaneous hypopigmentation, severe immunologic deficiency with neutropenia and lack of natural
killer cells, a bleeding tendency, and neurologic abnormalities. It is caused by mutations in the CHS1/LYST gene.64

Chapter 5

Papillon-Lefèvre syndrome and Haim-Munk syndrome
are two of the many different types of palmoplantar keratoderma, differing from the others by the occurrence
of severe early-onset periodontitis with premature loss
of the primary and permanent dentition. In addition,
Haim-Munk syndrome is characterized by arachnodactyly, acroosteolysis, and onychogryphosis.65 Hart and colleagues66 have shown that both of these AR syndromes
are due to different mutations in the cathepsin C (CTSC)
gene. A possible role for a mutation in this gene has also
been reported in patients with generalized nonsyndromic
aggressive periodontitis.67

AGGRESSIVE (EARLY-ONSET) PERIODONTITIS
Early-onset periodontitis may occur in the primary dentition (prepubertal periodontitis), may develop during puberty (JP), or may be characterized by exceedingly rapid
loss of alveolar bone (rapidly progressive periodontitis).
Along with hypophosphatasia, prepubertal periodontitis
appears to be the most commonly encountered cause of
premature exfoliation of the primary teeth, especially in
girls (Fig. 5-10).62
JP has the following features:
  
1.	An early onset of the breakdown of periodontal bone.
This bone loss is of two types: chronic periodontitis
in a generalized form affecting any dental area and a
localized form in which the molar or incisor regions
of bone are the most severely affected.
2.	Bone destruction that is rapid and vertical, with specific microorganisms associated with the periodontal
lesion.
3.	Familial aggregation, especially in the molar and
incisor types. It seems probable that the generalized
and localized types represent two different aspects of
the same disorder; this discussion considers them as a
complex entity called familial JP.
  
Evaluation of the same IL-1α and IL-1β polymorphisms
found by Kornman and colleagues51 to be associated with
periodontitis in adult nonsmokers was performed by
Diehl and colleagues in black and white families with two
or more members affected with early-onset periodontitis.68 Interestingly, they found the IL-1 alleles associated
with high risk of early-onset periodontitis to be the ones
suggested previously to be correlated with low risk for severe adult periodontitis. They concluded that early-onset
periodontitis is a complex, oligogenic disorder (i.e., involving a small number of genes), with IL-1 genetic variation having an important but not exclusive influence on
o Age in years

71
•

•
38
•

38
•

Normal, examined
professionally
Reported affected
Affected

16
•

15
•

13
•

7
•

6
•

4
•

Deceased

Figure 5-10 Pedigree of family with juvenile periodontitis, a

dominant trait.

n

Clinical Genetics for the Dental Practitioner

101

disease risk. Aggressive periodontitis-1 is caused by mutation in the CTSC gene, which is also involved in PapillonLefèvre syndrome and Haim-Munk syndrome, while
aggres­sive periodontitis-2 has been mapped to a different
chromosomal location (1q25).69-71

GENETICS OF MALOCCLUSION
The study of occlusion pertains to relationships between
teeth in the same dental arch, as well as between the two
dental arches when the teeth come together. Many factors
are involved in the definition of normal occlusion. Some
of the most important orofacial parameters of occlusion
are airway function, soft tissue anatomy and function,
size of the maxilla, size of the mandible (both rami and
body), arch form, anatomy of teeth (including malformation), agenesis of teeth, and rotation of teeth. All of these
important elements must be included in the concept of
occlusion.
Malocclusion is perhaps somewhat easier to define.
One may simply say that malocclusion is a significant
deviation from normal occlusion. However, this description is useful only if one considers the multiple aspects
implicit in such a definition. Normal occlusion and malocclusion are dynamic concepts that involve the interrelationships of many factors, not a few of which have
been shown to be influenced by genetic factors. Genetic
influences on each occlusal trait are rarely due to only a
single gene, which would be necessary for malocclusion
to be due to the simple inheritance of discrete skeletal
and dental characteristics. Instead, malocclusions are often polygenic with the potential for environmental influence and are therefore complex traits. Even though we
will focus on genetic factors, it should always be remembered that malocclusion can be greatly or even predominantly influenced by environmental factors, particularly
for occlusal variables. It has been suggested that the rapid
increase in malocclusion in indigenous Australian people
was produced by dietary factors concurrent with industrialization, emphasizing the importance of environmental influences on occlusal variation and the variability of
apparent genetic determinants with respect to the environment or population in which they are measured.72-74
Likewise Kawala et al., after studying the concordance of
malocclusion in twins, showed that the distribution
of within-pair malocclusions depended upon the gender
of the individuals, and supported the impact of environmental factors.75
Theoretically, there are two general ways in which predisposing or causative factors for malocclusion could be
due to heritable characteristics. One would be inheritance
of a disproportion between the size of the teeth and the
jaws, resulting in crowding or spacing issues. Posterior and/
or anterior Bolton discrepancies are defined as a disproportion among the sizes of individual teeth between the two
arches. To achieve good occlusion with the ideal overbite
and overjet, the maxillary and mandibular teeth must be
proportional in their mesial-distal dimensions. If some
teeth are not proportional, then there could be crowd­
ing, spacing issues, and/or an effect on overbite and or
overjet, even if the arches are in a favorable relationship.

102

Chapter 5

n

Clinical Genetics for the Dental Practitioner

Certainly hypodontia, as well as the often-associated
smaller size of teeth that are often agenic, or other teeth,
can contribute to malocclusion. This is particularly evident in patients with hypodontia or even oligodontia,
which may occur spontaneously or be part of a syndrome
such as hypohidrotic ectodermal dysplasia (HED), which
can be caused by mutations in the EDA gene. Other mutations in the same gene may cause nonsyndromic dental
agenesis, and, in a Hong Kong Chinese Class I malocclusion sample, variations in the EDA gene and the gene for
its receptor, XEDAR, have been associated with dental
crowding greater than 5 mm.76 Several other genes in addition to EDA and XEDAR, associated with syndromic or
nonsyndromic hypodontia/oligodontia, including MSX1,
PAX9, AXIN2, WNT10A, and LTBP3 (see Chapter 3),
could also contribute to variations in tooth size in general
or for specific teeth.
The other general way in which predisposing or causative factors for malocclusion could be due to heritable
characteristics would be inheritance of a disproportion in
the position, size, or shape of the mandible and maxilla.
Note that the influence on bony morphology could be
secondary to heritable effects, including those on cartilage,
collagen, muscle fibers, other connective tissue components, and growth factors. For example, in a study conducted by Yamaguchi and colleagues on the association
of the Pro561Thr (P56IT) variant in the growth hormone
receptor (GHR) gene with craniofacial measurements on
lateral cephalometric radiographs, it was found that individuals without the GHR P56IT allele had a significantly
greater mandibular ramus length (condylion-gonion)
than did those with the GHR P56IT allele in a normal
Japanese sample of 50 men and 50 women.77 The average
mandibular ramus height in those with the GHR P56IT
allele was 4.65 mm shorter than that in those without the
GHR P56IT allele. This significant correlation between the
GHR P56IT allele and shorter mandibular ramus height
was confirmed in an additional 80 women.
Class III malocclusion morphology is heterogeneous,
with various degrees of incidence among different ethnic
groups, and various facial patterns may, as a composite, result in the condition.78,79 There is a strong heritable component in Class III malocclusion in general, with modes
of inheritance being reported to be polygenic,80 AD in
a Libyan sample,81 and AD with incomplete penetrance
with a multifactorial component in a Brazilian sample.82
The variations in ethnic incidence, as well as variations
in morphology that we lump together into the category
of Class III malocclusion, may also reflect variations in
genes involved in “different” Class III malocclusions. This
concept of genetic heterogeneity influencing the range of
subphenotypes or subtypes in what we call a Class III malocclusion is supported by genetic linkage and association
studies finding several different genes or genetic markers
to be significant for Class III malocclusion among different ethnic groups, with some genes or genetic markers
appearing to be different among the ethnic groups, and
other Class III malocclusion genes or markers possibly
being in common among the groups. Until recently, the
vast majority of Class III malocclusion genetics studies
had been completed in Asian populations and implicated

multiple chromosomal regions including 1p35, 1p36,
4p16.1, 6q25, 12q13, 14q24.3, and 19p13.2.83-89 A study
of Class III malocclusion in Colombia yielded significant
genetic linkage to 1p22.1, 3q26.2, 11q22, 12q13.13, and
12q23 in patients primarily with maxillary hypoplasia.90
Another study of Class III malocclusion in Colombian
and Brazilian families, primarily with mandibular prognathism in the presence or absence of maxillary hypoplasia, found linkage to the chromosome.91 Another genetic
association study of a sample of Class III malocclusion
patients from the United States, consisting mostly of Caucasian individuals, was race-, age-, and gender-matched
with Class I/orthognathic control individuals, with genetic markers used for a set of candidate genes. There was a
significant (p = 0.02) association of the Class III malocclusion with the marker rs10850110 located upstream of the
myosin 1H gene (MYO1H) on chromosome 12q24.11.92
The influence of muscle on skeletal morphology is further supported by research in myosin gene expression,
muscle fiber type differences, and skeletal malocclusions.
Gene expression evaluation in masseter muscle from individuals undergoing orthognathic surgery for skeletonbased malocclusions found a trend for increased MYO1H
and MYO1C expression in Class III malocclusion compared
with Class II malocclusion. There were significant correlations (p < 0.05) between MYO1C expression and fiber-type
percent occupancy in masseter muscle from individuals
with normal and deep-bite malocclusions. Significant correlations were also identified between MYO1C and MHC
(myosin heavy chain) gene expression. The mechanism
of how the MYO1H and MYO1C genes and their protein
products influence the Class III phenotype, however, remains unknown. It has been postulated that altered glucose transport during condylar cartilage growth may be
one of the cellular mechanisms that promotes mandibular prognathism, as well as development of open and
deep-bite skeletal malocclusions through masseter muscle
fiber-type differences.93 Analysis of the DNA sequences
from an Estonian family recently uncovered a rare heterozygous missense mutation associated with Class III
skeletal malocclusion in the dual-specificity phosphatase
6 (DUSP6) gene (c.545C>T; p.Ser182Phe; rs139318648).
Affected individuals in this family were largely characterized as having a straight profile with maxillary deficiency. This rare variant co-segregated with the disease and
followed an AD pattern of inheritance with incomplete
penetrance. The DUSP6 gene encodes a cytoplasmic dualspecificity phosphatase that acts as a negative regulator
of the MAP kinases, ERK1/2. This protein is involved in
some fundamental signaling processes that occur at the
early stages of skeletal development, and can be transcriptionally upregulated via the fibroblast growth factor
(FGF)/FGF receptor signaling pathway.94 (For further details on the genetics of Class III malocclusion, see “Family
History and Genetics of Mandibular Prognathism.”95)
The studies previously mentioned dealt with differ­
ences in jaw morphology. What about differences in
growth velocity during puberty? Certainly, increased accuracy in the estimation of pubertal facial growth would
be of great benefit prior to the utilization of different therapeutic modalities including orthodontics, orthopedic

Chapter 5

growth modification, and surgery. The pubertal growth
spurt response is mediated by the combination of sex steroids; growth hormone; insulin-like growth factor (IGFI); and other endocrine, paracrine, and autocrine factors.
Testosterone and estradiol in mice have a direct, genderspecific stimulatory activity on male- and female-derived
chondroprogenitor cell proliferation. Testosterone stimulated growth and local production of IGF-I and IGF-I-R
in chondrocyte cell layers of an isolated organ culture of
the mouse mandibular condyle.96 Administration of low
doses of testosterone in boys with delayed puberty accelerates not only their statural growth rate but also their
craniofacial growth rate.97 Estrogens are a group of hormones involved in growth and development.98
Aromatase (also known as estrogen synthetase, encoded
by the CYP19A1 gene) is a key cytochrome P450 enzyme
involved in estrogen biosynthesis.99 This steroidogenic
enzyme catalyzes the final step of estrogen biosynthesis
by converting testosterone and androstenedione to estradiol and estrone, respectively.100 Regulation of this gene’s
transcription is critical for the testosterone/estrogen (T/E)
ratio in the body since aromatase plays an important role
in the conversion of androgens to estrogens. Some studies have shown that the T/E ratio is critical in the deve­
lopment of gender-indexed facial characteristics such as
the growth of cheekbones, the mandible, and chin; the
prominence of eyebrow ridges; and the lengthening of
the lower face.101,102 The difference in the average sagittal jaw growth between two groups of Caucasian males
with different CYP19A1 alleles with the greatest differences in growth per year was just over 1.5 mm per year
during treatment for the maxilla, and 2.5 mm per year for
the mandible. There was no statistically significant difference for the particular CYP19A1 alleles in females. It is
particularly interesting that at the beginning of treatment
there was no statistically significant difference among the
males based on the CYP19A1 genotype. The difference expressed itself only over the time of treatment during the
cervical vertebral stage associated with increased growth
velocity.103,104 Interestingly, the same result was found
in a group of Chinese males and females, strongly suggesting that this variation in the CYP19A1 gene may be a
multiethnic marker for sagittal facial growth.105 Although
the difference in average annual sagittal mandibular and
maxillary growth based on this CYP19A1 genotype were
significant, as one factor in a complex trait (sagittal jaw
growth), it accounts for only part of the variation seen,
and therefore, by itself, has little predictive power.106
King and colleagues noted that many studies that estimate the heritability of craniofacial structures may have
a bias, because they have generally involved individuals
who had not undergone orthodontic treatment, and that
those judged to have an extreme malocclusion were often
excluded. They found that, in contrast to the relatively
high heritability of cephalometric variables and low heritability of occlusal variables in individuals with naturally
occurring good occlusion, the heritability estimates for
craniofacial skeletal variables in those with overt malocclusions were significantly lower and the heritability estimates for occlusal variations were significantly higher.
This observation supports the idea that everyone does not

n

Clinical Genetics for the Dental Practitioner

103

react to specific environmental factors in the same manner, although those who are related are more likely to react similarly. To quote King and colleagues108:
We propose that the substantive measures of intersib similarity for occlusal traits reflect similar responses to environmental factors common to both
siblings. That is, given genetically influenced facial
types and growth patterns, siblings are likely to respond to environmental factors (e.g., reduced masticatory stress, chronic mouth breathing) in similar
fashions. Malocclusions appear to be acquired, but
the fundamental genetic control of craniofacial
form often diverts siblings into comparable physiologic responses leading to development of similar
malocclusions.
Although we have some information about genetic
influence on specific traits (e.g., missing teeth, occlusal
patterns, tooth morphology, and even mandibular prognathism), these cases are exceptions; we do not have sufficient information to make accurate predictions about
the development of occlusion simply by studying the
frequency of its occurrence in parents or even siblings.
Admittedly, family patterns of resemblance are frequently
obvious, but predictions must be made cautiously because
of the genetic and environmental variables and their interaction, which are unknown and difficult to evaluate.
Currently the results of studies on the genetic and environmental factors that influence the development of
malocclusion are representative of the samples studied,
not necessarily of any particular individual. In addition,
the extent to which a particular trait is influenced by genetic factors may have little, if any, effect on the success
of environmental (treatment) intervention. Even so, it
may be that genetic factors that influenced a trait will also
influence the response to intervention to alter that trait,
or other genetic factors may be involved in the response.
Therefore, the possibility of altering the environment to
gain a more favorable occlusion theoretically exists, even
in individuals in whom the malocclusion has a relatively
high genetic influence. However, the question of how environmental and genetic factors interact is most relevant
to clinical practice because it may explain why a particular alteration of the environment (treatment) may be successful in one compliant patient and not in another.109
Multiple factors and processes contribute to individual
responses to treatment. Some patients exhibit unusual
untreated growth patterns, treatment outcomes, or reactions to medications linked to polymorphic genes. Analysis
of overall treatment response requires a systems analysis
based on informatics for integration of all relevant information. The influence of genetic factors on treatment
outcome must be studied and understood in quantitative
terms for it to be applied effectively for each patient. Conclusions from retrospective studies must be evaluated by
prospective testing for a true evaluation of their value in
practice. Genetics studies are necessary to further the evidence base for practice. Only then will we begin to truly
understand how nature (genetic factors) and nurture (environmental factors, including treatment) together affect
treatment of our patients.

104

Chapter 5

n

Clinical Genetics for the Dental Practitioner

EXTERNAL APICAL ROOT RESORPTION
Basic descriptors of root resorption are based on the anatomic region of occurrence; that is, designations are internal root resorption and external root resorption (cervical root
resorption and external apical root resorption [EARR]).
EARR is a frequent iatrogenic outcome associated with
orthodontic treatment and may also occur in the absence
of orthodontic treatment.110,111 Although orthodontic
treatment is associated with some maxillary central incisor EARR in most patients, and more than one third of
those treated experience greater than 3 mm of loss, severe
EARR (>5 mm) occurs in 2% to 5% of cases.112,113
Currently, there are no reliable markers to predict either who will develop EARR or its severity following or­
thodontic tooth movement, although the shape of the
root does appear to be associated with the likelihood of
EARR and is best examined on periapical rather than panoramic radiographs. Even when duration of treatment is
a factor, along with several significant dentofacial structural measurements (e.g., overjet), it does not account for
enough of the observed variability to be useful as a predictor of EARR.113
Although orthodontic tooth movement, or biomechanics, has been found to account for approximately one
tenth to one third of the total variation in EARR, OwmanMoll and colleagues showed that individual variation
overshadowed the force magnitude and the force type in
defining the susceptibility to histologic root resorption associated with orthodontic force.114 Individual variations
were considerable regarding both extension and depth of
histologic root resorption within individuals, and these
were not correlated to the magnitude of tooth movement
achieved.115
The degree and severity of EARR associated with or­
thodontic treatment are multifactorial, involving host and
environmental factors,116 with genetic factors accounting
for at least 50% of the variation overall and approximately
two thirds of the variation seen in maxillary central incisor EARR.117,118 In addition, studies in a panel of different
inbred mice also supported a genetic component involving
multiple genes in histologic root resorption.119,120
The potential for IL-1β to have an effect on root resorption was supported by the increase in orthodontically
induced histologic root resorption in the absence of the
IL-1β cytokine in a knockout mouse model122,123 and a
P2rx7 knockout mouse model,124,125 because a lack of the
P2rx7 receptor results in a lack of IL-1β. In both of these
models, there was no difference at baseline between the
histologic root resorption in wild-type (“normal”) and
knockout mice, whereas the application of force resulted
in a significant increase in histologic root resorption in
the wild-type mice. In addition, there was a significant (p
< 0.02) increase in histologic root resorption in both types
of knockout mice compared to the respective wild-type
mice when the same force was applied in all the mice.
Thus, there was a significant interaction between the ge­
notype and environment (orthodontic force) in histologic root resorption.
There have been at least seven clinical studies of
whether the +3953/4 (G/A) SNP rs1143634 DNA marker

variation in the IL-1B gene is associated with variation
in EARR concurrent with orthodontia. Three studies of
cohorts from the United States (Caucasian),121 Brazil,126
and Spain127 found a significant association, whereas four
others, from Japan,128 Germany,129 Portugal,130 and the
Czech Republic,131 did not find a significant association.
In addition, a meta-analysis of studies investigating the
IL-1B +3953/4 polymorphism and EARR concurrent with
orthodontic treatment found no publication bias or association. Other DNA markers for other genes have been
investigated as well, with some finding a significant association and others none.132 Most of these studies investigated only one, or possibly two, genetic markers,
and sometimes clinical factors such as length of treatment and extraction of premolars are also included in the
analysis. Since from the beginning of these studies it was
appreciated that EARR concurrent with orthodontia is a
complex trait, future studies should endeavor to study
as many genetic and treatment factors as possible in as
many orthodontic patients as possible to gain a better understanding of this phenomenon.

GENETICS OF CLEFT LIP AND PALATE
Studies of the CLP phenotype in twins indicate that
monozygous twins have a 35% concordance rate, whereas
dizygous twins show less than 5% concordance.133 Information from two sources (families and twins) establishes
a genetic basis for CLP, but despite many extensive investigations, no simple pattern of inheritance has been demonstrated. This has led to proposals for a variety of genetic
modes of inheritance for CLP, including dominance, recessiveness, and gender linkage, and has led ultimately
to the documentation of modifying conditions that may
be present, such as incomplete penetrance and variable
gene expressivity.134 There are three important reasons
for the failure to resolve the question of a hereditary basis
for clefts: (1) some clefts are of a nongenetic origin and
should not be included in a genetic analysis (such cases
are seldom recognized and are difficult to prove); (2) individuals who have increased genetic liability for having
a child with CLP often fail to be recognized, but because
they do not have CLP themselves, they cannot be identified with certainty (this latter situation defines the problem of nonpenetrance for genes that control CLP)107; and
(3) CLP, although sometimes appearing to be relatively
simple in origin, is undoubtedly a complex of diseases
with different etiologies lumped together because of clinical disease resemblance (they all show clefting).
There are two clearly recognized groups of etiologically different clefts: cleft lip either with or without cleft
palate, CL(P), and isolated cleft palate (cleft palate only,
CPO). These two entities, CL(P) and CPO, can occur as
both single and multiple cases in a family. In the former
they are called sporadic, and in the latter they are called
familial or multiplex. Some researchers refer to multiplex
cases as those individuals with findings in addition to an
oral cleft, even if a specific syndrome is not recognized. It
should also be noted that CPO that occurs without a cleft
of the lip is different from the palatal cleft that occurs
as a part of CL(P). The embryology and developmental

Chapter 5

timing are different, and CPO is more commonly part of
a syndrome than is CL(P). CPO is less common, with a
prevalence of approximately 1 per 1500 to 2000 births in
Caucasians, whereas CL(P) is more common, with 1 or 2
per 1000 births. The prevalence of CPO does not vary in
different racial backgrounds, but the prevalence of CL(P)
varies considerably, with Asians and Native Americans
having the highest rate and Africans the lowest. There
are also gender ratio differences, with more males having
CL(P) and more females having CPO. Except in a small
number of syndromes such as Van der Woude syndrome,
families with one type of clefting segregating in the family do not have the other cleft type occurring at a rate
higher than the population prevalence.
When all potential study groups for CL(P) and CPO are
considered, the minimum number is six: three subgroups
for CL(P) and three for CPO. These three for each type
of cleft are the sporadic and the familial groups, and a
group of syndromes that feature CL(P) and/or CPO. Approximately 30% of CL(P) and 50% of CPO patients have
one of the more than 400 syndromes described.135
As noted earlier, it is probable that minor and subtle facial changes are more likely to produce the best-correlated
phenotype needed to pinpoint the cleft genotype. Part of
the reason for this view is the suspicion that certain facial
shapes are more predisposed to developing CL(P) than
others,136,137 and that subepithelial defects of the upper
lip musculature are part of the phenotypic spectrum of
oral clefts and may represent an occult, subclinical manifestation of the anomaly.138 Although this approach
seems best for producing an accurately generated clefting
phenotype, further study of the developmental anatomy
of the head and face is needed.
The published data on nonsyndromic cleft populations come from around the world (Japan, China, Hawaii, Denmark, Sweden, the United Kingdom, and
North America). These studies make it clear that both
CL(P) and CPO are heterogeneous diseases; that is, there
are multiple causes for the single phenotypes. The generally accepted hereditary basis for CL(P) and CPO can
be summarized as follows: Single, nonsyndromic cases
of CL(P) and CP, or sporadic clefts, are believed to be
the result of a complex interaction between multiple
genetic and environmental factors. Hence, their etiology is multifactorial in the true sense of the word, and
the chance that these multiple factors would interact to
produce a cleft phenotype in relatives is small, probably
less than 1%.
The other nonsyndromic group consists of multiple
cases of clefts that occur in a single family. These are
called familial (or multiplex) and have been viewed by researchers as the “true” genetic cases. Familial occurrences
of CL(P) and CPO seem most likely to be attributed to
the action of a single major gene, but the influence of
multifactorial (complex) trait factors is difficult to rule
out. Thus we are left with the idea that both multifactorial and single major gene elements may have a role in
producing sporadic and familial cases of CL(P) and CPO.
(For an overview of genetic and other factors in orofacial
clefting, the reader is referred to the paper by Leslie and
Marazita.139)

n

Clinical Genetics for the Dental Practitioner

105

An example of an environmental (dietary) factor associated with a decrease in neural tube defects such as
spina bifida, as well as orofacial clefting, is the maternal
intake of folate (folic acid), now a common component in
prenatal vitamins. To be effective, such vitamins or other dietary supplements must be used at least around the
time of conception because of the embryologic timing of
neural tube closure, and lip and palate formation. Because
of the public health importance and critical need before
a woman may realize that she is pregnant, folic acid fortification of grains in the United States became mandatory
January 1, 1998, specifically to reduce the occurrence of
neural tube defects, which has been successful. This has
also, to a lesser degree, reduced the occurrence of orofacial clefting. Interestingly, however, it did not decrease
the occurrence of orofacial clefting in children whose
mothers smoke cigarettes.140
Although some genetic and environmental risk factors for CL(P) have been identified, many nonsyndromic
clefts are not linked to any of these factors. Furthermore,
there is a paucity of information available on the longterm consequences for children born with CL(P) or CPO.
To address these concerns, the National Center on Birth
Defects and Developmental Disabilities at the Centers
for Disease Control and Prevention conducted a workshop entitled “Prioritizing a Research Agenda for Orofacial Clefts.” Experts in the fields of epidemiology, public
health, genetics, psychology, speech pathology, dentistry, health economics, and others participated in this
workshop to review the state of knowledge on orofacial clefts, identify knowledge gaps that need additional
public health research, and create a prioritized public
health research agenda based on these gaps. Their report
is recommended to the reader as an excellent summary of
the current knowledge and future research priorities for
orofacial clefting.141

REFERENCES
1.	Bamshad MJ, Ng SB, Bigham AW, et al.: Exome sequencing as a tool for Mendelian disease gene discovery, Nat Rev
Genet 12:745–755, 2011.
2.	Kilpinen H, Barrett JC: How next-generation sequencing
is transforming complex disease genetics, Trends Genet 29:
23–30, 2013.
3.	Everett ET, Hartsfield JK Jr: Mouse models for craniofacial
anomalies. In Biological mechanisms of tooth movement and
craniofacial adaptation, Boston, 2000, Harvard Society for
the Advancement of Orthodontics.
4.	Lejeune J, Turpin R, Gautier J: Le mongolisme; premier
exemple d’aberration et autosomique humaine, Ann Genet
1:41–49, 1959.
5.	Manning M, Hudgins L: Professional Practice and Guidelines
Committee. Array-based technology and recommendations
for utilization in medical genetics practice for detection of
chromosomal abnormalities, Genet Med 12:742–745, 2010.
6.	Henderson LB, Applegate CD, Wohler E, et al.: The impact
of chromosomal microarray on clinical management: a retrospective analysis, Genet Med 16:657–664, 2014.
7.	Hopper JL: Heritability in biostatistical genetics and genetic epidemiology, New York, 2002, Wiley.
8.	Harris EF: Interpreting heritability estimates in the or­
thodontic literature, Semin Orthod 14:125–134, 2008.

106

Chapter 5

n

Clinical Genetics for the Dental Practitioner

9.	Abass S, Hartsfield JK Jr: Investigation of genetic factors
affecting complex traits using external apical root resorption as a model, Semin Orthod 14:115–124, 2008.
10.	Tucker A, Sharpe P: The cutting-edge of mammalian development; how the embryo makes teeth, Nat Rev Genet
5(7):499–508, 2004.
11.	Croissant R, Guenther H, Slavkin H: How are embryonic
pre-ameloblasts instructed by odontoblasts to synthesize
enamel? In Slavkin HC, Greulich RC, editors: Extracellular
matrix influences on gene expression, New York, 1975, Academic Press.
12.	Sharpe PT: Neural crest and tooth morphogenesis, Adv Dent
Res 15:4–7, 2001.
13.	Dean JA, et al.: Dentin dysplasia, type II linkage to chromosome 4q, J Craniofac Genet Dev Biol 17(4):172–177, 1997.
14.	Schulze C, Lenz F: Uber Zahnschmelzhypoplasie von unvollstandig dominatem geschlechtgebundened Erbang,
Z Mensch Vererb Konstitutionsl 31:104–114, 1952.
15.	Hartsfield JK Jr: The benefits of obtaining the opinion of a
clinical geneticist regarding orthodontic patients. In Integrated
Clinical Orthodontics, Krishnan V, Davidovitch Z, editors,
Oxford, 2012, Wiley-Blackwell.
16.	Martelli-Junior H, Santos Neto P, Aquino S, et al.: Amelogenesis imperfecta and nephrocalcinosis syndrome: a case
report and review of the literature, Nephron Physiol 118:
62–65, 2011.
17.	Wang S, Aref P, Hu Y, et al.: FAM20A mutations can cause
enamel-renal syndrome (ERS), PLoS Genet 9:e1003302, 2013.
18.	Mulvihill JJ: Craniofacial syndromes: no such thing as a
single gene disease, Nat Genet 9(2):101–103, 1995.
19.	Park WJ, Bellus GA, Jabs EW: Mutations in fibroblast growth
factor receptors: phenotypic consequences during eukaryotic development, Am J Hum Genet 57(4):748–754, 1995.
20.	Escobar V, Bixler D: On the classification of the acrocephalosyndactyly syndromes, Clin Genet 12(3):169–178, 1977.
21.	Everett ET, et al.: A novel FGFR2 gene mutation in Crouzon
syndrome associated with apparent nonpenetrance, Cleft
Palate Craniofac J 36(6):533–541, 1999.
22.	Rosenberg RN, Stuve O, Eagar T: 200 years after Darwin,
JAMA 301(6):660–662, 2009.
23.	Fraga MF, et al.: Epigenetic differences arise during the lifetime of monozygotic twins, Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 102(30):
10604–10609, 2005.
24.	Feinberg AP: Epigenetics at the epicenter of modern medicine, JAMA 299(11):1345–1350, 2008.
25.	Kruglyak L, Lander ES: Complete multipoint sib-pair analysis of qualitative and quantitative traits, Am J Hum Genet
57(2):439–454, 1995.
26.	Slatkin M: Linkage disequilibrium—understanding the evolutionary past and mapping the medical future, Nat Rev
Genet 9(6):477–485, 2008.
27.	Abecasis GR, Cardon LR, Cookson WO: A general test of
association for quantitative traits in nuclear families, Am
J Hum Genet 66(1):279–292, 2000.
28.	Klein H, Palmer CE: Studies of dental caries. V. Familial resemblance in caries experience in siblings, Public Health Rep
53:1353–1364, 1938.
29.	Klein H: The family and dental disease. IV. Dental disease
(DMF) experience in parents and offspring, J Am Dent Assoc
33:735–743, 1946.
30.	Li Y, Caufield PW: The fidelity of initial acquisition of mutans streptococci by infants from their mothers, J Dent Res
74(2):681–685, 1995.
31.	Chaffee B, Gansky S, Weintraub J, et al.: Maternal oral bacterial levels predict early childhood caries development,
J Dent Res 93:238–244, 2014.

32.	Book JA, Grahnen H: Clinical and genetical studies of dental
caries. II. Parents and sibs of adult highly resistant (cariesfree) proposition, Odontol Rev 4:1–53, 1953.
33.	Dahlberg G, Dahlberg B: Uber Karies und andere Zahnveranderungen bei Zwillingen, Uppsala Lakerf Forh 47:395–416,
1942.
34.	Mansbridge JN: Heredity and dental caries, J Dent Res 38(2):
337–347, 1959.
35.	Horowitz SL, Osborne RH, DeGeorge FV: Caries experience
in twins, Science 128(3319):300–301, 1958.
36.	Caldwell RC, Finn SB: Comparisons of the caries experience
between identical and fraternal twins and unrelated children, J Dent Res 39:693–694, 1960.
37.	Bretz WA, et al.: Dental caries and microbial acid production in twins, Caries Res 39(3):168–172, 2005.
38.	Corby PM, et al.: Heritability of oral microbial species in
caries-active and caries-free twins, Twin Res Hum Genet
10(6):821–828, 2007.
39.	Corby PM, Bretz WA, Hart TC, et al.: Mutans streptococci in
preschool twins, Arch Oral Biol 50(3):347–351, 2005.
40.	Shuler CF: Inherited risks for susceptibility to dental caries,
J Dent Educ 65(10):1038–1045, 2001.
41.	Slayton RL, Cooper ME, Marazita ML: Tuftelin, mutans
streptococci, and dental caries susceptibility, J Dent Res
84(8):711–714, 2005.
42.	Deeley K, Letra A, Rose EK, et al.: Possible association of amelogenin to high caries experience in a Guatemalan-Mayan
population, Caries Res 42(1):8–13, 2008.
43.	Stanley B, Feingold E, Cooper M, et al.: Genetic association of MPPED2 and ACTN2 with dental caries, J Dent Res
93(7):626–632, 2014.
44.	Chaussain C, Bouazza N, Gasse B, et al.: Dental caries and
enamelin haplotype, J Dent Res 93:360–365, 2014.
45.	Zeng Z, Shaffer J, Wang X, et al.: Genome-wide association
studies of pit-and-fissure-and smooth-surface caries in permanent dentition, J Dent Res 92(5):432–437, 2013.
46.	Vieira AR, Marazita ML, Goldstein-McHenry T: Genome-wide
scan finds suggestive caries loci, J Dent Res 87(5):435–439,
2008.
47.	Bretz WA, Corby PM, Melo MR, et al.: Heritability estimates
for dental caries and sucrose sweetness preference, Arch Oral
Biol 51(12):1156–1160, 2006.
48.	Hunt HR, Hoppert CA, Rosen S: Genetic factors in experimental rat caries. In Sognnaes RF, editor: Advances in experimental caries research, Washington, DC, 1995, American
Associates for the Advancement of Science.
49.	Ciancio SG, Hazen SP, Cunat JJ: Periodontal observations in
twins, J Periodontal Res 4(1):42–45, 1969.
50.	Michalowicz BS, Aeppli D, Virag G, et al.: Periodontal findings in adult twins, J Periodontol 62(5):293–299, 1991.
51.	Kornman KS, Crane A, Wang HY, et al.: The interleukin-1
genotype as a severity factor in adult periodontal disease,
J Clin Periodontol 24(1):72–77, 1997.
52.	Wagner J, Kaminski WE, Aslanidis C, et al.: Prevalence of
OPG and IL-1 gene polymorphisms in chronic periodontitis, J Clin Periodontol 34(10):823–827, 2007.
53.	Sakellari D, Katsares V, Gerogiadou M, et al.: No correlation
of five gene polymorphisms with periodontal conditions in
a Greek population, J Clin Periodontol 33(11):765–770, 2006.
54.	Fiebig A, et al.: Polymorphisms in the interleukin-1 (IL1) gene
cluster are not associated with aggressive periodontitis in a
large Caucasian population, Genomics 92(5):309–315, 2008.
55.	Nikolopoulos GK, et al.: Cytokine gene polymorphisms in
periodontal disease: a meta-analysis of 53 studies including 4178 cases and 4590 controls, J Clin Periodontol 35(9):
754–767, 2008.

Chapter 5

56.	Greenstein G, Hart TC: Clinical utility of a genetic
susceptibility test for severe chronic periodontitis: a
critical evaluation, J Am Dent Assoc 133(4):452–459;
quiz 492–453, 2002.
57.	Divaris K, Monda KL, North KE, et al.: Exploring the genetic
basis of chronic periodontitis: a genome-wide association
study, Hum Molec Genet 22:2312–2324, 2013.
58.	Schenkein HA: Inheritance as a determinant of susceptibility for periodontitis, J Dent Educ 62(10):840–851, 1998.
59.	Etzioni A, Tonetti M: Leukocyte adhesion deficiency II—
from A to almost Z, Immunol Rev 178:138–147, 2000.
60.	Arnaout MA, et al.: Point mutations impairing cell surface
expression of the common beta subunit (CD18) in a patient
with leukocyte adhesion molecule (Leu-CAM) deficiency,
J Clin Invest 85(3):977–981, 1990.
61.	Meyle J, Gonzales JR: Influences of systemic diseases on
periodontitis in children and adolescents, Periodontol
2000(26):92–112, 2001.
62.	Hartsfield JK Jr: Premature exfoliation of teeth in childhood
and adolescence, Adv Pediatr 41:453–470, 1994.
63.	Hartsfield JK Jr, Kousseff BG: Phenotypic overlap of EhlersDanlos syndrome types IV and VIII, Am J Med Genet
37(4):465–470, 1990.
64.	Nagle DL, et al.: Identification and mutation analysis of the
complete gene for Chediak-Higashi syndrome, Nat Genet
14(3):307–311, 1996.
65.	Hart TC, et al.: Genetic studies of syndromes with severe
periodontitis and palmoplantar hyperkeratosis, J Periodontal
Res 32(1 Pt 2):81–89, 1997.
66.	Hart TC, et al.: Haim-Munk syndrome and Papillon-Lefèvre
syndrome are allelic mutations in cathepsin C, J Med Genet
37(2):88–94, 2000.
67.	Noack B, et al.: Cathepsin C gene variants in aggressive
periodontitis, J Dent Res 87(10):958–963, 2008.
68.	Diehl SR, et al.: Linkage disequilibrium of interleukin-1
genetic polymorphisms with early-onset periodontitis,
J Periodontol 70(4):418–430, 1999.
69.	Hart TC, Hart PS, Michalec MD, et al.: Haim-Munk syndrome and Papillon-Lefèvre syndrome are allelic mutations
in cathepsin, J Med Genet 37:88–94, 2000. Note: Erratum:
J Med Genet 38:79, 2001.
70.	Hewitt C, McCormick D, Linden G, et al.: The role of cathepsin C in Papillon-Lefèvre syndrome, prepubertal periodontitis,
and aggressive periodontitis, Hum Mutat 23:222–228, 2004.
71.	Li Y, Xu L, Hasturk H, et al.: Localized aggressive periodontitis is linked to human chromosome 1q25, Hum Genet
114:291–297, 2004.
72.	Corruccini RS: An epidemiologic transition in dental occlusion in world populations, Am J Orthod 86:419–426, 1984.
73.	Corruccini RS: Australian aboriginal tooth succession, interproximal attrition, and Begg’s theory, Am J Orthod Dentofacial Orthop 97:349–357, 1990.
74.	Corruccini RS, Townsend GC, Richards LC, et al.: Genetic
and environmental determinants of dental occlusal variation in twins of different nationalities, Hum Biol 62:353–367,
1990.
75.	Kawala B, Antoszewska J, Necka A: Genetics or environment? A twin-method study of malocclusions, World J Orthod
8:405–410, 2007.
76.	Ting TY, Wong RW, Rabie AB: Analysis of genetic polymorphisms in skeletal Class I crowding, Am J Orthod Dentofacial
Orthop 140:e9–e15, 2011.
77.	Yamaguchi T, Maki K, Shibasaki Y: Growth hormone receptor gene variant and mandibular height in the normal Japanese population, Am J Orthod Dentofacial Orthop
119(6):650–653, 2001.

n

Clinical Genetics for the Dental Practitioner

107

78.	Singh GD: Morphologic determinants in the etiology of
class III malocclusions: a review, Clin Anat 12(5):382–405,
1999.
79.	Bui C, King T, Proffit W, et al.: Phenotypic characterization
of class III patients, Angle Orthod 76(4):564–569, 2006.
80.	Litton SF, Acermann LV, Isaacson RJ, et al.: A genetic study
of Class 3 malocclusion, Am J Orthod 58(6):565–577, 1970.
81.	El-Gheriani AA, Maher BS, El-Gheriani AS, et al.: Segregation analysis of mandibular prognathism in Libya, J Dent
Res 82(7):523–527, 2003.
82.	Cruz RM, Krieger H, Ferreira R, et al.: Major gene and multifactorial inheritance of mandibular prognathism, Am J Med
Genet A 146A(1):71–77, 2008.
83.	Yamaguchi T, Park SB, Narita A, et al.: Genome-wide linkage analysis of mandibular prognathism in Korean and
Japanese patients, J Dent Res 84:255–259, 2005.
84.	Jang JY, Park EK, Ryoo HM, et al.: Polymorphisms in the
Matrilin-1 gene and risk of mandibular prognathism in Koreans, J Dent Res 89:1203–1207, 2010.
85.	Xue F, Wong RW, Rabie AB: Genes, genetics, and Class III
malocclusion, Orthod Craniofacial Res 13:69–74, 2010.
86.	Li Q, Zhang F, Li X, et al.: Genome scan for locus involved
in mandibular prognathism in pedigrees from China, PLoS
One 5(9):e12678, 2010, http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal
.pone.0012678.
87.	Li Q, Li X, Zhang F, et al.: The identification of a novel locus
for mandibular prognathism in the Han Chinese population, J Dent Res 90:53–57, 2011.
88.	Xue F, Rabie A, Luo G: Analysis of the association of COL2A1
and IGF‐1 with mandibular prognathism in a Chinese population, Orthod Craniofacial Res 17:144–149, 2014.
89.	Yamaguchi T, Park SB, Narita A, et al.: Genome-wide linkage analysis of mandibular prognathism in Korean and
Japanese patients, J Dent Res 84(3):255–259, 2005.
90.	Frazier-Bowers S, Rincon-Rodriguez R, Zhou J, et al.: Evidence of linkage in a Hispanic cohort with a class III dentofacial phenotype, J Dent Res 88(1):56–60, 2009.
91.	Falcão-Alencar G, Ortero LM, Cruz RM, et al.: Evidence for
genetic linkage of the Class III craniofacial phenotype with human chromosome 7 in 36 South American families (abstract/
program #975), Washington, DC, November 3, 2010, Presented at the 60th Annual Meeting of The American Society
of Human Genetics.
92.	Tassopoulou-Fishell M, Deeley K, Harvey EM, et al.: Genetic
variation in myosin 1H contributes to mandibular prognathism, Am J Orthod Dentofacial Orthop 141:51–59, 2012.
93.	Raoul G, Desh H, Gray SL, et al.: Expression of unconventional type-1 myosins (1H/1C) in masseter muscle influence
the development of skeletal malocclusion in orthognathic
surgery subjects, Int J Oral Maxillofacial Surg 42:1335, 2013.
94.	Nikopensius T, Saag M, Jagomägi T, et al.: A missense mutation in DUSP6 is associated with class III malocclusion,
J Dent Res 92:893–898, 2013.
95.	Otero L, Morford LA, Falcão-Alencar G, et al.: Family history and genetics of mandibular prognathism. In Ngan
PW, Deguchi T, Roberts WE, editors: Orthodontic treatment
of Class III malocclusion (eBook), Bentham Science, Beijing,
China, 2014, Bentham eBooks, pp 3–24.
96.	Maor G, Segev Y, Phillip M: Testosterone stimulates insulinlike growth factor-I and insulin-like growth factor-I-receptor
gene expression in the mandibular condyle—a model of
endochondral ossification, Endocrinology 140:1901–1910,
1999.
97.	Verdonck A, Gaethofs M, Carels C, et al.: Effect of low-dose
testosterone treatment on craniofacial growth in boys with
delayed puberty, Eur J Orthod 21(2):137–143, 1999.

108

Chapter 5

n

Clinical Genetics for the Dental Practitioner

98.	Honjo H, Tamura T, Matsumoto Y, et al.: Estrogen as a
growth factor to central nervous cells: estrogen treatment
promotes development of acetylcholinesterase-positive
basal forebrain neurons transplanted in the anterior eye
chamber, J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol 41:633–635, 1992.
99.	Bulun SE, Sebastian S, Takayama K, et al.: The human
CYP19 (aromatase P450) gene: update on physiologic roles
and genomic organization of promoters, J Steroid Biochem
Mol Biol 86:219–224, 2003.
100.	Guo Y, Xiong DH, Yang TL, et al.: Polymorphisms of estrogenbiosynthesis genes CYP17 and CYP19 may influence age at
menarche: a genetic association study in Caucasian females,
Hum Molec Genet 15:2401–2408, 2006.
101.	Schaefer K, Fink B, Mitteroecker P, et al.: Visualizing facial
shape regression upon 2nd to 4th digit ratio and testosterone, Collegium Antropologicum 29:415–419, 2005.
102.	Schaefer K, Fink B, Grammer K, et al.: Female appearance: facial and bodily attractiveness as shape, Psych Sci 48:187–204,
2006.
103.	Hartsfield JK Jr, Zhou J, Chen S: The importance of analyzing specific genetic factors in facial growth for diagnosis and treatment planning. In McNamara JA, Kapila SD,
editors: Surgical enhancement of orthodontic treatment, Ann
Arbor, 2010, University of Michigan.
104.	McNamara JA, Kapila SD: Monograph 47, Craniofacial Growth
Series, Department of Orthodontics and Pediatric Dentistry and
Center for Human Growth and Development, Ann Arbor, 2010,
The University of Michigan. 267–281.
105.	He S, Hartsfield JK Jr, Guo Y, et al.: Association between
CYP19A1 genotype and pubertal sagittal jaw growth, Am
J Orthod Dentofacial Orthop 142:662–670, 2012.
106.	Hartsfield JK Jr, Morford LA, Otero LM: Genetic factors affecting facial growth. Chapter 6. In Bourzgui F, editor: Orthodontics—basic aspects and clinical considerations, pp 125–152,
InTech Press, March 2012. http://www.intechopen.com/
articles/show/title/genetic-factors-affecting-facial-growth.
107.	Harris JE: Genetic factors in the growth of the head. Inheritance of the craniofacial complex and malocclusion, Dent
Clin North Am 19(1):151–160, 1975.
108.	King L, Harris EF, Tolley EA: Heritability of cephalometric and
occlusal variables as assessed from siblings with overt malocclusions, Am J Orthod Dentofacial Orthop 104(2):121–131,
1993.
109.	Hartsfield JK Jr: Development of the vertical dimension: nature and nurture, Semin Orthod 8:113–119, 2002.
110.	Harris EF, Butler ML: Patterns of incisor root resorption before and after orthodontic correction in cases with anterior
open bites, Am J Orthod Dentofacial Orthop 101(2):112–119,
1992.
111.	Harris EF, Robinson QC, Woods MA: An analysis of causes
of apical root resorption in patients not treated orthodontically, Quintessence Int 24(6):417–428, 1993.
112.	Killiany DM: Root resorption caused by orthodontic treatment: an evidence-based review of literature, Semin Orthod
5(2):128–133, 1999.
113.	Taithongchai R, Sookkorn K, Killiany DM: Facial and dentoalveolar structure and the prediction of apical root shortening, Am J Orthod Dentofacial Orthop 110(3):296–302, 1996.
114.	Owman-Moll P, Kurol J, Lundgren D: Continuous versus interrupted continuous orthodontic force related to early tooth
movement and root resorption, Angle Orthod 65(6):395–401,
1995.
115.	Kurol J, Owman-Moll P, Lundgren D: Time-related root
resorption after application of a controlled continuous ortho­
dontic force, Am J Orthod Dentofacial Orthop 110(3):303–310,
1996.

116.	Ngan DC, Kharbanda OP, Byloff FK, et al.: The genetic contribution to orthodontic root resorption: a retrospective
twin study, Aust Orthod J 20(1):1–9, 2004.
117.	Harris EF, Kineret SE, Tolley EA: A heritable component for
external apical root resorption in patients treated orthodontically, Am J Orthod Dentofacial Orthop 111(3):301–309,
1997.
118.	Hartsfield JK Jr, Everett ET, Al-Qawasmi RA: Genetic factors
in external apical root resorption and orthodontic treatment, Crit Rev Oral Biol Med 15(2):115–122, 2004.
119.	Al-Qawasmi RA, Harsfield JK Jr, Everett ET, et al.: Root resorption associated with orthodontic force in inbred mice:
genetic contributions, Eur J Orthod 28(1):13–19, 2006.
120.	Abass SK, Hartsfield JK Jr, Al-Qawasmi RA, et al.: Inheritance of susceptibility to root resorption associated with
orthodontic force in mice, Am J Orthod Dentofacial Orthop
134:742–750, 2008.
121.	Al-Qawasmi RA, et al.: Genetic predisposition to external apical root resorption, Am J Orthod Dentofacial Orthop
123(3):242–252, 2003.
122.	Al-Qawasmi RA, et al.: Root resorption associated with or­
thodontic force in IL-1beta knockout mouse, J Musculoskelet
Neuronal Interact 4(4):383–385, 2004.
123.	Hartsfield JK Jr: Pathways in external apical root resorption
associated with orthodontia, Orthod Craniofac Res 12:236–242,
2009.
124.	Viecilli RF, Katona TR, Chen J, et al.: Three-dimensional mechanical environment of orthodontic tooth movement and
root resorption, Am J Orthod Dentofacial Orthop 133(6):791,
2008. e711–e726.
125.	Viecilli RF, et al.: Orthodontic mechanotransduction and
the role of the P2X7 receptor, Am J Orthod Dentofacial Orthop 135:694, 2009. 135(6):694.e1–e16.
126.	Bastos Lages EM, Drummond AF, Pretti H, et al.: Association of functional gene polymorphism IL-1β in patients
with external apical root resorption, Am J Orthod Dentofacial
Orthop 136:542–546, 2009.
127.	Iglesias-Linares A, Yañez-Vico R, Ballesta-Mudarra S, et al.:
Postorthodontic external root resorption is associated with
IL1 receptor antagonist gene variations, Oral Dis 18:198–205,
2012.
128.	Tomoyasu Y, Yamaguchi T, Tajima A, et al.: External apical
root resorption and the interleukin-1B gene polymorphism
in the Japanese population, Orthod Waves 68:152–157,
2009.
129.	Gülden N, Eggermann T, Zerres K, et al.: Interleukin-1 polymorphisms in relation to external apical root resorption
(EARR), J Orofac Orthop 70:20–38, 2009.
130.	Pereira S, Lavado N, Npgieora L, et al.: Polymorphisms of
genes encoding P2X7R, IL-1B, OPG and RANK in ortho­
dontic-induced apical root resorption, Oral Dis online, 2013.
http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/odi.12185/pdf.
131.	Linhartova P, Cernochova P: Izakovicova Holla L: IL1 gene
polymorphisms in relation to external apical root resorption concurrent with orthodontia, Oral Dis 19:262–270,
2013.
132.	Al-Qawasmi RA, Hartsfield JK Jr, Everett ET, et al.: Genetic predisposition to external apical root resorption in
or­thodontic patients: linkage of chromosome-18 marker,
J Dent Res 82(5):356–360, 2003.
133.	Shields ED, Bixler D, Fogh-Andersen P: Facial clefts in Danish twins, Cleft Palate J 16(1):1–6, 1979.
134.	Fogh-Andersen P: Incidence of harelip and cleft palate, Copenhagen, 1942, Nyt Nordisk Forlag.
135.	Lidral AC, Moreno LM, Bullard SA: Genetic factors and orofacial clefting, Semin Orthod 14:103–114, 2008.

Chapter 5

136.	Ward RE, Moore ES, Hartsfield JKJ: Morphometric characteristics of subjects with oral facial clefts and their relatives.
In Wyszynski DF, editor: Cleft lip and palate from origin to
treatment, New York, 2002, Oxford University Press.
137.	Weinberg SM, Neiswanger K, Richtsmeier JT, et al.: Threedimensional morphometric analysis of craniofacial shape in
the unaffected relatives of individuals with nonsyndromic
orofacial clefts: a possible marker for genetic susceptibility,
Am J Med Genet A 146A(4):409–420, 2008.
138.	Weinberg SM, Brandon CA, McHenry TH, et al.: Rethinking
isolated cleft palate: evidence of occult lip defects in a subset of cases, Am J Med Genet A 146A(13):1670–1675, 2008.

n

Clinical Genetics for the Dental Practitioner

109

139.	Leslie EJ, Marazita ML: Genetics of cleft lip and cleft palate,
Am J Med Genet C Semin Med Genet 163:246–258, 2013.
140.	Yazdy MM, Honein MA, Xing J: Reduction in orofacial
clefts following folic acid fortification of the U.S. grain supply, Birth Defects Res A Clin Mol Teratol 79(1):16–23, 2007.
141.	Yazdy MM, Honein MA, Rasmussen SA, et al.: Priorities for
future public health research in orofacial clefts, Cleft Palate
Craniofac J 44(4):351–357, 2007.

CHAPTER

6

Child Abuse and Neglect
s Shannon L. Thompson, Brian J. Sanders, and Roberta A. Hibbard

For additional resources, please visit the

website.

CHAPTER OUTLINE
DEFINING CHILD ABUSE
Physical Abuse
Sexual Abuse
Neglect
Emotional or Psychological Abuse
Medical Child Abuse
THE VICTIMS OF ABUSE
POSSIBLE INDICATORS OF CHILD
ABUSE
Physical Indicators
Behavioral Indicators

EVALUATING SUSPECTED CASES
OF CHILD ABUSE
History-Taking
Communication with the Patient
Physical Examination
MANAGING SUSPECTED CASES
OF CHILD ABUSE
Treatment
Documentation
Reporting
Parental Concerns

C

hild abuse and neglect affect millions of children
in the United States each year and are found in
all ethnic, cultural, and socioeconomic sections
of our society. The long-term effects resulting from child
maltreatment are deleterious and often involve physical,
cognitive, and emotional impairments in childhood that
clearly correlate with morbidity in adulthood. It has been
reported that orofacial trauma is present in approximately 50% to 75% of all reported cases of physical abuse.1
Many of the injuries common to abuse in children are
thus within the scope of dentistry and are easily observed
by the dental professional.1 This places dental professionals in a unique position to identify victims of child maltreatment. Dentists must therefore be knowledgeable of
their responsibilities in the recognition, documentation,
treatment, and reporting of suspected child abuse cases.
To intervene appropriately, dental professionals must first
be willing to consider the possibility of abuse or neglect
when faced with unusual injuries; otherwise it cannot be
diagnosed.2 “The public and the profession are best served
by dentists who are familiar with identifying the signs of
abuse and neglect and knowledgeable about the appropriate intervention resources …” (statement by ADA’s Council on Ethics, Bylaws, and Judicial Affairs, April 2000).
This chapter includes a discussion of the types of child
maltreatment frequently encountered, the clinical presentation and management of suspected child abuse, and
the documentation and reporting required in these cases.

DEFINING CHILD ABUSE
Child abuse and neglect encompass a variety of experiences that are threatening or harmful to the child and are
the result of acts of commission or omission on the part of
110

UNDERSTANDING THE LEGAL
REQUIREMENTS
Obligation of the Dentist
CONCLUSION

a responsible caretaker. Child maltreatment can present
in many forms and may be divided into the categories of
physical abuse, sexual abuse, emotional or ­psychological
abuse, and neglect (Table 6-1).3 Although maltreatment
is not always willful, meaning that the harm or injury
inflicted is not always intended, it can nonetheless result
in significant damage to the child and, in too many cases,
death. Professionals from multidisciplinary backgrounds
working together are in the best position to identify,
treat, and intervene on the behalf of this vulnerable population. Dental professionals also have an opportunity to
take a proactive role in helping these victims by recognizing child abuse in its many forms.

PHYSICAL ABUSE
Physical abuse can be defined as a nonaccidental inflicted
physical injury (ranging from minor bruises to severe fractures or death) that occurs as a result of harming a child
by a parent, caregiver, or other person who has responsibility for the child.4 It is often the most easily recognized
form of child maltreatment. The battered child syndrome
was initially described by Kempe and colleagues in 1962
and was further elaborated by Kempe and Helfer in 1972
as the clinical picture of physical trauma in which the
explanation of injury was not consistent with the severity
and type of injury observed.5,6 Physical abuse is usually
recognized by the pattern of injury and/or its inconsistency with the related history. Bruises, welts, fractures,
burns, and lacerations are examples of commonly inflicted physical injuries. Studies have consistently shown that
head, face, and neck injuries that can easily be recognized
by the dentist occur in more than half the cases of child
abuse,7 and 25% of physical abuse injuries occur in or
around the mouth.

Chapter 6

Table 6-1
Types of Child Maltreatment3
Types of Abuse

Description

Physical abuse

Any nonaccidental injury or trauma
to the body of a child by a parent or
caregiver.
Sexual abuse
Any sexual behavior or activity with
a minor or the exploitation of a
minor, by an adult, for the sexual
pleasure of someone else.
Neglect
Occurs when an adult knowingly
permits a child to endure pain or
suffering or fails to provide the
basic needs for proper development.
Categorized as physical, medical,
educational, and emotional.
Emotional abuse A pattern of behavior that impedes a
child’s development and self-esteem
by constant criticizing or belittling
or failing to provide love and/or appropriate guidance.

SEXUAL ABUSE
Sexual abuse is defined by the Federal Child Abuse Prevention and Treatment Act (CAPTA) as “the employment,
use, persuasion, inducement, enticement, or coercion
of any child to engage in, or assist any other person to
engage in, any sexually explicit conduct or simulation
of such conduct for the purpose of producing a visual
depiction of such conduct; or the rape, and in cases of
caretaker or inter-familial relationships, statutory rape,
­molestation, prostitution, or other form of sexual exploitation of children, or incest with children.”4 Sexual abuse
essentially includes any sexually stimulating activity that
is inappropriate for the child’s age, level of cognitive development, or role within the family. Sexually abusive
acts can include activities such as exhibitionism, kissing,
fondling, intercourse, child pornography, child prostitution, and rape. Oral findings of trauma to the mouth from
sexual contact or lesions from sexually transmitted infections can readily be identified by dentists who maintain a
high index of suspicion when faced with these findings.
Some states include age criteria or an age differential in
their statutes defining some forms of sexual abuse. Practitioners should be aware that there are differences in state
definitions.

NEGLECT
Neglect is the failure of a parent, guardian, or other caregiver to provide for a child’s basic needs. It can be further
categorized as physical (e.g., failure to provide necessary
food or shelter, lack of appropriate supervision), medical (e.g., failure to provide necessary medical or mental
health treatment), educational (e.g., failure to educate a
child or attend to special education needs), or emotional
(e.g., inattention to a child’s emotional needs, failure to
provide psychological care, or permitting the child to use

n

Child Abuse and Neglect

111

alcohol or other drugs).4 Whereas physical abuse tends to
be episodic, neglect tends to be chronic and more insidious and may present through failure to take the child for
appropriate dental care, which may be just one manifestation of a larger picture of neglect.8 The American Academy
of Pediatric Dentistry defines dental neglect as the “willful
failure of a parent or guardian to seek and follow through
with treatment necessary to ensure a level of oral health
essential for adequate function and freedom from pain
and infection,”9 and is the most frequent type of abuse
seen by dentists.10 Factors that can play a role in failure
to seek adequate dental care can include family isolation,
lack of finances, parental ignorance, or lack of perceived
value of oral health.7 Dentists should be aware of these
factors and attempt to assist families in overcoming these
barriers when possible. The level of medical and dental
care, adequate nutrition, and adequate food and clothing must be considered in light of cultural and religious
differences, poverty, and community requirements and
standards and the impact of such neglect on the physical
well-being of the child.

EMOTIONAL OR PSYCHOLOGICAL ABUSE
Emotional abuse can be defined as a pattern of behavior
that impairs a child’s emotional development or sense of
self-worth, which may include constant criticism, threats,
or rejection, as well as the withholding of love, support,
or guidance.4 It has been a concern for many years, but
standards for identifying and proving such abuse have
been extremely difficult to establish. Demonstrating the
direct or causal link between the emotional and verbal
abuse and the harm to the child can be difficult. Harm
to the child generally occurs in various ways over a prolonged period of time and usually manifests as abnormal
behaviors, high-risk–taking behaviors, or mental health
­problems that are multifactorial in origin. Continuous isolation, rejection, degradation, terrorization, c­orruption,
exploitation, and denial of affection are examples of behaviors that frequently have significant damaging effects
on the child.

MEDICAL CHILD ABUSE
Perhaps the most difficult form of child maltreatment to
identify and treat is a factitious disorder. Initially called
Munchausen syndrome by proxy, and then pediatric condition falsification, the problem is one of child abuse in the
medical setting. It occurs when a perpetrator (usually the
mother) fabricates or exaggerates signs and/or symptoms
of illness, or induces illness or signs and/or symptoms
of illnesses in the child, causing unnecessary and harmful or potentially harmful testing, procedures, and treatments to be performed on the child. This form of abuse
is different from all other forms of child maltreatment
in that the medical community is unwittingly a part of
the abuse. Because health care providers are often dependent on the parental history of the child’s illness, it takes
some time for the practitioner to realize the inconsistencies and possibly fabricated or exaggerated nature of the
complaints. These children often present with persistent
and recurrent illnesses that cannot be explained and
signs and symptoms that do not clinically make sense.

112

Chapter 6

n

Child Abuse and Neglect

The m
­ otivation of the perpetrators of this form of abuse
can be multifactorial (e.g., to gain medical attention, as a
result of parental psychosis, or to obtain money or services) but is not considered in the making of a diagnosis of
medical child abuse. The bizarre nature of many of these
cases makes them almost unbelievable to the professionals involved, which can unfortunately lead to failure to
protect the child.

THE VICTIMS OF ABUSE
Children from all walks of life can be victims of child
abuse or neglect—no age, race, gender, or socioeconomic level is spared. Each year millions of children are
reported to children’s protective services or law enforcement authorities as suspected victims of abuse.3 According to the National Child Abuse and Neglect Data System
(NCANDS), child protective service agencies received an
estimated 3.4 million referrals involving approximately
6.3 million children in 2012.11 Statistics on child abuse
reflect only those cases known or suspected, and all studies struggle with the component of the unknown. The
Child Maltreatment 2012 report (NCANDS) noted that,
of the victims reported, more than 75% (78.3%) suffered
neglect, more than 15% (18.3%) suffered physical abuse,
and fewer than 10% (9.3%) suffered sexual abuse.11 As is
often the case, children may be the victim of more than
one type of maltreatment. These statistics reflect a child
counted once for each maltreatment type.
Sociodemographic characteristics of maltreated children
vary somewhat by the type of abuse or neglect. A
­ ccording
to the Child Maltreatment 2012 report, victims in their
first year of life had the highest rate of victimization, at
21.9 per 1000 children of the same age in the national
population. Boys accounted for 48.7% and girls accounted
for 50.9% of victims, and the majority of victims consisted of three races or ethnicities—White (44.0%), Hispanic
(21.8%), and African-American (21.0%).11 Child fatalities
are clearly the most tragic consequence of maltreatment.
Based on NCANDS 2012 data, a nationally estimated 1640
children died from abuse and neglect, of whom nearly
three quarters (70.3%) were younger than 3 years of age
and 85.5% were comprised of the three aforementioned
ethnicities—White (38.3%), African-American (31.9%),
and Hispanic (15.3%).11
Most episodes of child abuse and neglect take place
within the child’s family and are symptomatic of the
family’s dysfunction.3 Characteristics that are overrepresented among families of maltreated children, and
therefore considered risk factors, include the presence
of multiple children in the home, lower socioeconomic
status, interpartner violence, substance abuse, and illness
and financial stresses. Children living in violent homes
are increasingly recognized as victims of maltreatment.
Infants and young children are more likely to be abused
because of their defenselessness, physical fragility, and
inability to escape an angry parent or caregiver, whereas
adolescents often trigger violent responses from their
caregivers by challenging parental authority.12 Risk factors certainly play a role, but ultimately every child is a
potential victim.

POSSIBLE INDICATORS OF CHILD ABUSE
As stated earlier, child abuse and neglect cannot be identified if they are not considered as a diagnostic possibility.
The dental professional must be willing to consider the
diagnosis of abuse to make the diagnosis. Dentists who
have been educated to recognize the signs of child maltreatment are 5 times more likely to make a report than
dentists who have not.13 Indicators of child abuse and neglect are those signs or symptoms that should raise one’s
suspicions to the possibility of child maltreatment. The
presence of such indicators is not diagnostic of maltreatment but should lead dentists to be more thoughtful in
their consideration when faced with concerning injuries/
illnesses. Child abuse should be included in the differential diagnosis. Many of the signs and symptoms are nonspecific and may be present for a variety of reasons, child
abuse being only one of those reasons. Indicators of abuse
and neglect often depend on the child’s age and developmental level, and may vary with the child’s experiences
and resiliency.

PHYSICAL INDICATORS
There are numerous common physical signs that should
alert one to the possibility of physical abuse and/or neglect. Some physical indicators of physical abuse include
unexplained bruises, fractures, burns, lacerations, and
abrasions. Although many injuries are accidental, dental
professionals should always maintain a high index of suspicion for any traumatic injury, especially those in which
there is either no explanation given or the explanation is
not consistent with or plausible for the injury seen.
Unexplained bruises, abrasions, welts, or lacerations
in places not routinely subject to the child’s rough-and-­
tumble lifestyle are those that should be considered suspicious for abusive injury. For example, bruises on the
shins and forehead or overlying bony prominences are
expected in normal healthy active toddlers, whereas those
seen on the neck, upper arms, or abdomen are not. Bruising in any infant who is not yet ambulating or cruising
is suspicious. Unexplained injuries on the face, especially
the cheeks; clusters of bruises or bruises that appear patterned, reflecting the shape of an article; and scattered significant bruises on different surface areas appearing to be
at various stages of healing are all suspicious. The study by
Pierce et al. on bruising characteristics of abused children
versus accidental injuries found clear evidence that the
following should be considered a red flag and serve as a
sign for possible physical abuse: bruising without a clear
confirmatory history for any infant not cruising and bruising to the torso-ear-neck (TEN) region of a child younger
than 4 years of age (TEN-4 guideline).13 Trauma resulting
in injuries to the teeth, mouth, lips, tongue, or cheeks
inconsistent with an accident is an indicator that should
be readily identified by the dental professional.1 Any unexplained fracture, especially in children younger than 2
years of age, multiple fractures in various stages of healing,
or injuries to the growth centers of bones should raise real
concern. While all such injuries can be accidental, a clear
and plausible explanation must be sought. For example, a
simple linear skull fracture may result from a short-height

Chapter 6

fall (less than 3 to 4 feet). However, such a fall would
not explain a skull fracture accompanied by intracranial
hemorrhage (e.g., subdural hematoma) and brain injury
with severe multilayer retinal hemorrhages; this would be
much more characteristic of abusive head trauma. Burns
are another form of recognizable child abuse. Intentional
cigarette (Fig. 6-1) and immersion burns are readily distinguishable from accidental splash burns in that they typically have a uniform depth and clear lines of demarcation
and can be symmetric. Suspicious burn patterns require a
careful history and scene investigation to determine the
etiology. Another physical indicator of physical abuse is
evidence of delayed or ­inappropriate treatment of injuries. There are also physical indicators of neglect, which
can include abandonment, consistent lack of appropriate supervision, unattended medical or dental needs, a
distended abdomen, an emaciated appearance, poor hygiene, or being inappropriately or inadequately dressed
for conditions. Indicators of dental neglect include untreated extensive caries that could easily be d
­ etected by a
layperson; untreated pain, infection, bleeding, or trauma
affecting the orofacial region; or lack of continuity of care
in the presence of identified dental disease.3

BEHAVIORAL INDICATORS
Significant behavioral changes often linked to the various forms of child maltreatment include withdrawal,
­depression, poor school performance, regression in developmentally appropriate behavior, acting out, c­ linginess,
and somatic complaints. Young maltreated children may
show inappropriate affection toward others or may be
extremely wary and distant in social interactions. Many
abused children will still demonstrate affection toward
an abusive parent, which should not be construed as

n

Child Abuse and Neglect

113

e­vidence against maltreatment. Children who express
fear of going home, appear frightened by their parents,
show a lack of spontaneous smiling, or avoid eye contact
with their parents are displaying behavioral indicators for
maltreatment. Any child who reports injury by caretakers
should be taken s­eriously. Extensive lists can be found
describing behavioral indicators of possible maltreatment. These should be considered in light of the child’s
entire clinical history and presentation and not in isolation. When other explanations for such behaviors are not
found, maltreatment is an appropriate consideration.
Behavioral indicators for physical abuse may also be
present in caretakers. These include both a lack of concern and inappropriately high levels of concern in relation to the severity of the child’s injury, defensiveness or
hostility when questioned, and refusal of needed further
evaluation and care for the child. Other behavioral indicators include an explanation that is inconsistent with
the pattern of injury or the child’s abilities or an explanation that changes when the perpetrator realizes that the
first story was not believed. Poor judgment, jealousy or
extreme protectiveness, excessive watchfulness or vigilance, child abandonment, violent behavior, and erratic
behavior (suggesting substance abuse or mental illness)
are other clues to possible maltreatment by caretakers.
Indications of possible medical child abuse can include
doctor or emergency department “shopping” or excessive
use of medical care for an apparently well child. A child
who is seen for repeated ingestions of harmful substances
or has repeated hospitalizations for the same or similar
constellation of symptoms with largely negative diagnostic testing is also concerning.
Like pediatricians, dental professionals have a continuing relationship with their pediatric patients and their
families, since it is often necessary for a patient to be seen
several times a month.8 This provides the dental professional with ample opportunity to recognize any concerning physical and behavioral indicators of physical abuse
and neglect and to intervene when necessary to protect
potential victims of abuse.

EVALUATING SUSPECTED CASES
OF CHILD ABUSE
Trauma to the orofacial structures is a frequent manifestation of child abuse: it is present in as many as 50%
to 75% of all reported cases of child physical abuse.1
Because abusive parents do not always show the same
caution when visiting the dentist as when visiting the
physician, the dental practitioner may be the first person
to identify the abused child. The dentist must therefore
learn to screen for maltreatment as a basic part of any
clinical examination performed on a child14 and complete a thorough ­history as well as a thorough dental
and general physical examination. The dentist must
learn to recognize an abused child and make the appropriate referrals.15
Figure 6-1 Intentional cigarette burn. (From Zitelli BJ, Davis

HW: Atlas of pediatric physical diagnosis, ed 5, Philadelphia,
2008, Mosby.)

HISTORY-TAKING
A certain combination of information is what influences
or creates the suspicion of possible child maltreatment.

114

Chapter 6

n

Child Abuse and Neglect

Historical information should include a complete dental and medical history. Details regarding any trauma
should be complete and obtained separately from more
than one source (e.g., parent and child), if possible, and
in the presence of another staff member to act as a witness.14 The use of open-ended questions is favored, and
“yes” or “no” questions should be avoided. Often, the
best question is, “What happened?” The dentist need
ask only for a level of detail that would be indicative of
a suspicion for reportable abuse or neglect. Such details
might include who witnessed the injury and who was
with the child at the time of the injury; where the child
and supervising adults were at the time of the injury;
and details about what, how, and when the incident
occurred. A description of present and past injuries,
as well as the child’s developmental abilities, is usually helpful. Situations raising the strongest suspicions
are those in which the pattern of injury is not consistent with the account offered to explain it. The history
should be consistent with the injury as it relates to the
mechanism of the injury, the timing of the injury, and
the developmental level of the child. For example, a
3-month-old (nonambulatory) infant cannot sustain
a spiral femur fracture from crawling. A bruise in the
shape of a handprint on the cheek does not result from
a fall down the stairs (Fig. 6-2). Conflicting accounts
from two or more individuals (e.g., parents or a parent
and child) or historical accounts that change over time
should raise concerns. Additionally, any s­ignificant

Figure 6-2 Bruise in the shape of a handprint on the cheek.

i­njury that is reportedly “unwitnessed” is reasonable
cause for suspicion.

COMMUNICATION WITH THE PATIENT
In most circumstances, professionals who are identifying and reporting suspected child maltreatment will
have to talk to children to clarify a possible suspicion.
They should not, however, be conducting investigative
interviews of children to learn explicit details or sort out
the truthfulness of comments. The goal of questioning
should be limited to obtaining the information needed to
care appropriately for the child and help inform opinions
about suspicions of child maltreatment. If, based on this
information, including one’s own knowledge and experience, there is reason to believe that the child may have
been abused or neglected, a report should be made to the
appropriate child protection agency, whose job it is to investigate such concerns. It is appropriate to listen to and
provide support for the child who is talking and wants to
disclose more.

PHYSICAL EXAMINATION
The examination of the patient by a dentist should include a careful and thorough intraoral and perioral exam
in addition to exposed areas of the body that can be examined without undressing the child. The examination
should be completed before any treatment is initiated.
Observations should be assessed in the context of the age,
developmental level, and known history of the child, and
should include the patient’s posture, gait, and clothing.
Dental staff should also be trained in recognizing abuse
and neglect so that they may alert the dentist if they have
concerns. Inappropriate dress may be cause for concern.
For example, a child who appears with a long-sleeved
shirt in the middle of the hot summer may be dressed in
this manner to cover old injuries.
The dentist should start the examination at the top,
beginning with careful visual examination and palpation of the head, including hair, scalp, facial bones, and
mouth, and systematically work down. Findings that
may be of concern include alopecia, which without an
underlying medical cause may be an indicator of malnutrition or hair pulling. Subgaleal hematoma can be the
result of trauma to the scalp from direct trauma or violent hair pulling. Periorbital ecchymosis, subconjunctival
hemorrhages, ptosis, and deviated or unequal pupils may
­indicate significant facial trauma. A nasal fracture, deviated septum, and clotted blood are nasal findings that
may be of concern and indicate previous trauma. Bruising inside and behind the ears is worrisome for inflicted
trauma. Tympanic membrane damage can be of concern.
Other ­
common orofacial injuries include lacerations,
burns, abrasions, or bruises to the lips or corners of the
mouth; labial (maxillary) or lingual frenum tears; burns
or lacerations of the gingiva, tongue, palate, or floor of
the mouth; and past or present fractures to the facial
bones, condyles, ramus, or symphysis of the mandible,
which can result in malocclusion.3 Burns can be the result of forced ingestion of hot or caustic substances. A
torn maxillary frenum on a child who is immobile may
indicate possible trauma to the mouth from a slap, fist

Chapter 6

blow, or forced feeding, and a torn lingual frenum could
indicate sexual abuse or forced feeding (Figs. 6-3 and 6-4).
The mandible should be examined for any deviation on
opening, range of motion, trismus, and occlusion at rest.
The maxilla should also be examined for any mobility indicating a facial fracture. Bleeding under the tongue may
indicate a fracture of the body of the mandible. Examination of the teeth and their supporting structures may also
reveal concerns for abusive injury and may be present in
the form of missing teeth or previously traumatized teeth
(avulsions, luxations, intrusions, or fractures). Physical
exam findings of a child with dental neglect may reveal
a child with extensive, untreated dental caries, untreated
infection, or dental pain.

Figure 6-3 Torn frenulum from blunt force trauma to the

mouth. Upon further investigation, this child was found to
have 17 fractures.

n

Child Abuse and Neglect

Any bruise in the shape of an object, such as a belt,
looped cord, handprint, or hanger, should alert the practitioner to inflicted trauma. Though bruising cannot be
aged by its appearance, various colors of bruises can be
indicative of the several stages of resolution and may suggest ongoing trauma. The neck should be examined for
evidence of ligature marks or bruises (Fig. 6-5) with associated facial petechiae that may indicate attempted strangulation. Physical trauma to the child’s chest or ribs may
elicit a painful response from the child if a lifting motion
is used to slide the child up to the top of the dental chair
and may warrant further examination.
Bite marks should be suspected when bruising, abrasions, or lacerations are found in an elliptical or ovoid pattern.7 Bite marks can occur anywhere, but most commonly
are found on the facial cheeks, back, sides, arms, buttocks,
and genitalia.3 Human bites tend to compress flesh, whereas animal bites typically result in tears and avulsions of the
flesh.7 The presence of adult bite marks (Fig. 6-6) is usually associated with physical or sexual abuse3 and can help

Figure 6-5 Attempted strangulation marks on the neck of

an adolescent. (From Hobbs CJ, Wynne JM: Physical signs of
child abuse: a colour atlas, ed 2, London, 2001, WB Saunders/
Harcourt Publishers.)

Figure 6-6 The presence of an adult bite mark may be a
Figure 6-4 Sublingual hemorrhage in an infant with signs of

genital and abdominal trauma.

115

sign of physical or sexual abuse or neglect. (From Shah BR,
Laude TA: Atlas of pediatric clinical diagnosis, Philadelphia,
2000, WB Saunders.)

116

Chapter 6

n

Child Abuse and Neglect

identify the abuser. An intercanine distance (linear distance between the central points of the cuspid tips) measuring more than 3.0 cm is suspicious for an adult bite.7 A
forensic odontologist or pathologist should be consulted
as soon as possible when adult bite marks are suspected.
These injuries should be clearly documented with detailed
information about their pattern, size, contour, and color.
They should be photographed, if possible, when they are
first observed because they tend to fade rapidly. Photographs should include a patient identification tag and
a scale marker. Photographs should be taken so that the
angle of the camera lens is directly over the bite and perpendicular to the plane of the bite, to avoid distortion.7
The American Board of Forensic Odontology has developed a special photographic scale for this purpose, which
can also be used in the documentation of other injuries
(ABFO No. 2 reference scale, Lightening Powder Company
Inc., Salem, OR, USA).7 Most law enforcement agencies will
dispatch a photographer if requested in child abuse cases.
Dentists are not as involved as other health professionals in the diagnosis of sexual abuse; however, there are certain signs and symptoms for which they should remain
alert.3 Bruising, erythema, or petechiae at the junction of
the soft and hard palates may indicate forced oral penetration (Fig. 6-7). Oral manifestations of s­ exually transmitted

infections can be apparent in sexually abused children.
Gonorrhea may appear symptomatically as anything from
erythema to ulcerations and from vesiculopustular to pseudomembranous lesions on the lips, tongue, palate, and/or
pharynx.3 Syphilis may manifest as a papule on the lip or
skin at the site of inoculation, which later ulcerates to form
the classic chancre in primary syphilis, and as a generalized
maculopapular rash in secondary syphilis.3 Condylomata
acuminata (Human papilloma virus, HPV) can appear as
single or multiple raised pedunculated, cauliflower-like lesions in the oral cavity, as well as genital and anal areas.3
Herpes simplex virus (HSV) presents as oral or perioral
painful erythematous eruptions with grape-like clusters of
vesicles that rupture to form crusted-over lesions. HPV and
HSV do not necessarily indicate sexual abuse as they have
both vertical (mother-to-child transmission in utero or
during birth) and horizontal (person-to-person or to self,
transmission via direct physical contact, airborne, or environmental contact) modes of transmission. Their presence
should raise the question of, but not be used as diagnostic
for, sexual abuse. This is unlike gonorrhea or syphilis,
which are both diagnostic of sexual abuse. Pregnancy in a
child under the age of sexual consent (varies by state, but
generally 12 to 13 years) is also diagnostic of sexual abuse
and should be reported. It is the combination of a complete history and physical examination that should form
one’s basis for the suspicion of child maltreatment, all
while considering the differential diagnosis. The primary
goal of detection is to prevent further injury to the child.

MANAGING SUSPECTED CASES
OF CHILD ABUSE
Clinical and medicolegal management of suspected child
abuse and neglect involves several basic steps: appropriate medical and dental treatment, complete and objective
documentation (including photographs), and reporting.
There are numerous reports in the dental literature in
which dentists initially suspected abuse-based orofacial
injuries, many of which were instances of severe child
abuse resulting in hospitalization or death.16 As health
care professionals, dentists should be especially sensitive
to the need for protecting children from abuse and neglect and should adopt routine protocols for the management of these cases when suspicion exists.

TREATMENT

Figure 6-7 Palatal hemorrhage from oral-genital contact.

Any medical or dental treatment that is indicated by the
child’s condition should be provided. The dentist can ensure that a child receives the immediate necessary attention. In cases of child abuse or neglect, if the dentist feels
competent and the problem or injury is restricted to the
mouth, definitive dental/medical care should be initiated.
More extensive trauma (e.g., fractures, lacerations, serious
injuries to the head) should be referred to the appropriate
medical and dental specialists.3 For example, a maxillofacial surgeon may be best qualified to provide treatment
for instances of severe trauma to the jaw, alveoli, or intraoral soft tissues.16 A plastic surgeon may be best qualified
to treat facial lacerations requiring extensive suturing.16
In cases of suspected head trauma, the child should be

Chapter 6

referred to a pediatrician or neurosurgeon familiar with
child abuse as soon as possible. Referral to a local ER/
hospital may be indicated for other trauma involving the
body, head, or extremities. Additionally, some cases may
require referral to the child’s primary care provider or a
child abuse pediatrician who can assist in considering the
complete differential diagnosis, identify medical conditions that can mimic or be confused with child abuse,
and perform any additional medical evaluation necessary.17 The dentist should always notify the specialist or
hospital/ER regarding his/her concern of maltreatment so
that these individuals may also be sensitive and helpful in
assessing the possibility of abuse.3,16 Referral to a physician does not eliminate the dentist’s obligation to make
a report to authorities if maltreatment is suspected. If the
treatment is within the scope of the dentist’s mandate,
definitive care should be given, followed by a discussion
with the caregiver regarding the treatment provided, the
prognosis, and any necessary follow-up care prior to any
discussion of the suspicion of child abuse.16

DOCUMENTATION
All data collected in the medical history and physical
examination must be documented in a complete and
objective manner. Pertinent positive and negative findings should be included. Findings should be documented
with a detailed description of the injuries and the history ­obtained for how they occurred. Actual comments in
quotations should be recorded whenever possible. Behaviors should also be objectively noted, and opinions about
those behaviors should be avoided. If possible, photographs of any visible injuries should be obtained, with the
child’s name and date of the photograph included in the
picture. Most law enforcement officials will take photographs if requested to do so when suspected child abuse is
reported. Also document why maltreatment is suspected.
When suspected maltreatment is reported to authorities,
the time, date, and method of reporting (telephone or
written report) should also be documented in the medical
and dental record.

REPORTING
Dentists must be informed about their responsibilities in
relation to child maltreatment as outlined by the American Dental Association. The dentist is obligated by law
to report suspected findings of child abuse to child protective service agencies and/or law enforcement officials.
­Reports of suspected child maltreatment to local authorities mandated to investigate allegations are allowable
without parental consent under Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act regulations. Underreporting
is a concern among all health professionals and is not
unique to dentists.18 Health care professionals are likely
to underreport cases of suspected abuse because of their
own values and attitudes toward abuse,18 due to concerns
about making false accusations,1 or because of a lack of
adequate training or education in the recognition of child
maltreatment.16 With increased public awareness and the
inclusion of courses on child abuse in the dental curriculum, ignorance of the laws regarding child abuse is not an
acceptable excuse. Health professionals who fail to report

n

Child Abuse and Neglect

117

reasonable suspicions of abuse may be subject to civil or
criminal charges. Those who report in good faith are protected from civil and criminal liability.
Reporting is initiated simply with a telephone call to
the appropriate child protective service or law enforcement agency, depending on local statutes. The telephone
call initiates a response by professionals trained in investigating and recognizing child abuse. The reasons for
the suspicion, with supporting documentation, should
be communicated both verbally and in writing. Dentists
are mandated to report based on “reasonable suspicion”
and are not responsible for any further investigation. If
the concern is dental neglect, the dentist must work with
the authorities to educate them on the diagnosis and need
for care and then establish and follow through on a plan
of treatment. While it is possible to report suspected child
abuse anonymously in most states, it is preferred that one
provide one’s contact information to help the agency understand the concerns. There should be no reluctance on
the part of the dentist to report suspected child abuse due
to concerns that it will require a great deal of time. In most
cases once the initial report has been filed, no further involvement is necessary on the part of the dentist, and few
cases require a court appearance. Detailed documentation
in the dental record may lessen the likelihood of the need
for a personal appearance.

PARENTAL CONCERNS
In most situations parents should be told about concerns
of possible child abuse or neglect and the legal requirement to report it to local authorities. This can help maintain the relationship with the patient and family. It can
also be helpful to ask the parent if there has ever been a
concern that someone might have hurt the child. Health
care professionals should take care not to make any accusations about who may have caused the harm. One may
consider using the following simple and direct statement:
“Because of an injury like this in a child of this age, we
have to think about all of the possible causes. Whenever
we are faced with this, I am required by law to make a
report to Child Protective Services.” When the dentist’s
action is presented to parents as motivated by concern for
the child and by an attitude of partnership in an effort to
figure out what has happened, many parents are eventually appreciative and will continue to seek support and
care from the reporting professional.
In situations in which a child is suspected to have been
significantly harmed in the home, in which the parent is
expected to be violent, or in which possible retribution
against the child for having made a disclosure about abuse
is a concern, it may be more prudent to contact the authorities first and have them present to protect the child
before parents are informed about suspicions of abuse.
Discussion about the severity of the situation with the authorities will aid in determining a plan about the disposition of the child (e.g., whether you should release the child
from the office or await the arrival of the authorities). The
dental professional has no legal obligation to inform parents that abuse or neglect is suspected or will be reported.
Decisions about this should be tailored to the specific situation. The welfare of the patient should be at the forefront

118

Chapter 6

n

Child Abuse and Neglect

of all decision making, and any concerns about losing a
patient from a practice should be secondary.

UNDERSTANDING THE LEGAL
REQUIREMENTS
There are mandates in all fifty states requiring that suspected child abuse and neglect be reported to proper state
authorities by dental professionals.18 These statutes may
vary somewhat from state to state regarding detailed definitions of child abuse and neglect, but there is no variance in the identification of all health care professionals
as mandated reporters. It is important to emphasize that
one is required to report reasonable suspicions of child
maltreatment, not proven allegations of abuse. Once suspicions have been reported, it is the responsibility of social
and legal authorities to determine the needs of the child
and family, whether maltreatment has occurred, and what
intervention or service is legally allowable or necessary.

OBLIGATION OF THE DENTIST
Dental professionals are mandated reporters under state
law and may face criminal sanctions for failing to report
cases. They also have a defined ethical duty to report, and
may be subject to private civil malpractice lawsuits if they
fail to notify state child protection agencies when appropriate.18 Some state statutes allow the mandated reporter
to be held liable for proximate damages caused by the failure to report. The privileged quality of communication
between the caretakers or the patient and the practitioner
is not grounds for excluding evidence in a judicial proceeding that either results from a report or results from failure
to make a report as required by law. Strict confidentiality
of records should always be maintained. Reports and any
other information obtained in reference to a report are
confidential and available only to persons authorized by
the juvenile code to examine them.
Again, it must be understood that absolute proof is not
required when making reports about suspicions of abuse. It
is the responsibility of child protective service agencies and
law enforcement officials to investigate suspicions and determine whether intervention is necessary. The health care
professional can provide invaluable assistance by giving as
much information as possible through communication and
coordination. Investigating professionals cannot do their
jobs if the health care professional does not share detailed
information regarding why the suspicions exist. Health care
professionals who are unhappy with the outcome of system
intervention (e.g., nothing was done) are usually those who
would not or did not provide the information available
that would have assisted authorities in making the bestinformed decisions. If the health care professional believes
that a bad decision is being made, a follow-up telephone
call to the assigned case worker or case worker’s supervisor
to clarify concerns and interventions is appropriate. Many
misperceptions exist about what interventions are possible legally. Clear communication and coordination can
improve everyone’s knowledge and understanding about a
child’s needs and what can be done to meet them.
In cases of dental neglect, the dentist should determine whether the failure to provide dental care is willful

or due to a lack of awareness, lack of finances, or lack of
perceived value of health care prior to filing a report with
proper authorities. Taking a good medical and dental history and making repeated attempts to obtain appropriate treatment for the child can help sort out these issues.
Dentists must be aware of these factors and attempt to
assist families to overcome any identified barriers as well
as provide clear explanations regarding the disease and its
implications.7 A call to a child protective service agency is
indicated if repeated attempts to address the cause of the
dental neglect are not met with success, since the manifestations of dental neglect (e.g., dental caries, periodontal disease) can cause significant pain, infection, and loss
of oral function if left untreated. This can result in adverse
effects on learning, communication, nutrition, and other
activities necessary for normal growth and development.7

CONCLUSION
Consequences of child abuse can be devastating, often
manifesting in emotional problems, cognitive impairments, mental health disturbances, and long-term physical problems.3 Society is also adversely affected by child
abuse through the substantial direct costs resulting from
the investigation, prosecution, and resulting health care
costs.3 It is known that, of the abused children who are
returned to the same environment without intervention,
many will be seriously reinjured or killed. It is thus imperative that health care professionals appropriately recognize and report suspected victims of child maltreatment
to prevent further injury and/or death to the child. Dental
professionals and offices can be instrumental in prevention efforts as well by facilitating community awareness
of child abuse through the provision of resource materials in waiting rooms, participation in organizations concerned with ending violence, and ensuring that all office
staff become familiar with the signs of abuse and be encouraged in the pursuit of continuing education on the
subject.14

REFERENCES
1.	Santos JF, et al.: Primary identification of an abused child
in dental office: a case report, J Indian Soc Pedodont Prev Dent
25(4):191–193, 2007.
2.	Jones R, et al.: Clinicians’ description of factors influencing
their reporting of suspected child abuse: report of the child
abuse reporting experience study research group, Pediatrics
112(2):259–266, 2008.
3.	Jessee S, Deinard S: Child abuse and neglect: implications
for the dental professional, Crest Oral-B at dentalcare.com,
Continuing Education Course, Revised November 30, 2012.
4.	Child Information Gateway Factsheet: What is child abuse
and neglect? recognizing the signs and symptoms, www.child
welfare.gov.
5.	Kempe CH, et al.: The battered child syndrome, J Am Med
Assoc 181:17–24, 1962.
6.	Kempe C, Helfer R: Helping the battered child and his family,
Philadelphia, 1972, JB Lippincott.
7.	American Academy of Pediatric Dentistry: Guideline on oral
and dental aspects of child abuse and neglect, AAP Committee
on Child Abuse and Neglect and AAPD, Council on Clinical
Affairs, Adopted, 1999, Revised 2005, Reaffirmed 2010.

Chapter 6

8.	Kiran K, Kamala BK: Child abuse and the role of a dental
­professional – the Indian scenario, Child Abuse Negl 35:157–158,
2011.
9.	American Academy of Pediatric Dentistry: Definition of dental neglect, Pediatr Dent 35(6):13, 2013-2014.
10.	Kilpatrick NM, et al.: Child protection: a survey of experience and knowledge within the dental profession of New
South Wales, Australia, Int J Ped Dent 9:153–159, 1999.
11.	U.S. Department of Health and Human Services: Administration for Children and Families, Administration on
Children, Youth and Families, Children’s Bureau, Child
maltreatment, 2012. available from http://www.acf.hhs.gov/
programs/cb/research-data-technology/statistics-research/
child-maltreatment.
12.	Da Fonesca M, et al.: Dental aspects of 1248 cases of child
maltreatment on file at a major county hospital, Pediatr Dent
14(3):152–157, 1992.
13.	Pierce MC, et al.: Bruising characteristics discriminating
physical child abuse from accidental trauma, Pediatrics
125:67–74, 2010.
14.	Tsang A, Sweet D: Detecting child abuse and neglect –
are dentists doing enough? J Can Dent Assoc 65:387–391,
1999.
15.	Harris JC, Sidebotham PD, Welbury RR: Safeguarding children in dental practice, Primary Care Dent 34:508–517,
2007.
16.	Needleman HL: Orofacial trauma in child abuse: types, prevalence, management and the dental profession’s involvement, Pediatr Dent 8(1 spec iss):71–80, 1986.

n

Child Abuse and Neglect

119

17.	Kellogg N: AAP Committee on Child Abuse and Neglect:
Oral and dental aspects of child abuse and neglect, Pediatrics
116(6):1565–1568, 2005.
18.	Katner DR, Brown C: Mandatory reporting of oral injuries
indicating possible child abuse, J Am Dent Assoc 143(10):
1087–1091, 2012.

SUGGESTED READINGS
American Dental Association Council on Dental Practice: The
dentist’s responsibility in identifying and reporting child abuse,
Chicago, 1987, The Association.
Bross DC: Managing pediatric dental patients: issues raised by
the law and changing views of proper child care, J Pediatr
Dent 26(2):125–130, 2004.
Croll TP, et al.: Rapid neurologic assessment and initial management for the patient with traumatic dental injuries, J Am
Dent Assoc 100:530–534, 1980.
Davis MJ, Vogel L: Neurological assessment of the child with
head trauma, J Dent Child 62:93–96, 1995.
Golden MH, Samuels MP, Southall DP: How to distinguish
between neglect and deprivational abuse, Arch Dis Child
88:105–107, 2003.
Sheridan MS: The deceit continues: an updated literature
review of Munchausen syndrome by proxy, Child Abuse Negl
27:431–451, 2003.
Sidebotham P, Golding J: ALSPAC Study Team: Child maltreatment in the “children of the nineties.” A longitudinal study
of parental risk factors, Child Abuse Negl 25:1177–1200, 2001.

PART

2

CHAPTER

7

CARIES AND PERIODONTOLOGY

Mechanical and
Chemotherapeutic
Home Oral Hygiene
s Christopher V. Hughes and Jeffrey A. Dean

For additional resources, please visit the

website.

CHAPTER OUTLINE
MICROBIAL ASPECTS OF ORAL
HYGIENE AND PLAQUE
FORMATION
MECHANICAL METHODS OF PLAQUE
CONTROL
Manual Toothbrush
Floss
Powered Mechanical Plaque
Removal
Dentifrices
Disclosing Agents

A

Other Adjuncts for Plaque Control
Techniques
Visual-Motor Skill Mastery
Time Considerations
CHEMOTHERAPEUTIC PLAQUE
CONTROL
Antiseptic Agents
Enzymes, Plaque-Modifying
Agents, and Plaque Attachment
Interference Agents
Sugar Substitutes

s the technological level of health care increases, it is important not to lose sight of the basics
of patient care. In dentistry, this means establishing and maintaining effective preventive habits in our
patients. No matter how sophisticated our dental techniques and procedures have become, preventive dentistry
is the foundation on which all oral health care must be
built. In 1960 McDonald discussed how pediatric medicine had changed in the previous 30 years (since 1930)
from 90% treatment and 10% prevention to just the reverse.1 He stated that preventive measures for dentistry
were available and remained to be applied, as they had
been in pediatrics. With this preventive philosophy, dentistry, particularly dentistry for children, has come a long
way toward reaching this ratio of 90% prevention to 10%
treatment.
At the core of this preventive foundation are home
oral hygiene and plaque control. The area of oral hygiene
has undergone recent developments that have turned a
mundane subject into a field of surprising growth and research. Modern biology has made new inroads into the
area of plaque control and will continue to exert a strong
120

AGE-SPECIFIC HOME ORAL HYGIENE
INSTRUCTIONS
Prenatal Counseling
Infants (Birth to 1 Year Old)
Toddlers (1 to 3 Years Old)
Preschoolers (3 to 6 Years Old)
School-Aged Children (6 to 12 Years
Old)
Adolescents (12 to 19 Years Old)
In-Office Oral Hygiene Programs

i­nfluence on how we look at oral hygiene and plaque in
the future. The traditional focus of oral hygiene has been
and will continue to be the control of the two most prevalent oral diseases: caries and periodontal disease. Although
plaque control is essential to oral hygiene, unlike with
periodontal disease, no clear relationship exists between
plaque control and the prevention of caries. As discussed
in Chapter 9 the complex etiology of decay centers on the
following factors: tooth susceptibility, bacterial plaque,
refined carbohydrates, and time. Many other variables, such
as oral sugar clearance, salivary flow, and pH and immune
factors, add to the complexity of this process. This may
help explain the difficulty in demonstrating a relationship
between oral hygiene practices and caries prevention.
Despite this ambiguity, plaque control remains an essential element in oral health. Although Marsh has shown
that the natural oral microflora confers several benefits on
the host, in the absence of oral hygiene, dental plaque
accumulates, which leads to shifts in bacterial populations away from those associated with health.2 Treatment
should therefore be designed to control rather than to
eliminate dental plaque.

Chapter 7

Not only have there been advances in biology, but the
public’s consciousness regarding home oral hygiene also
has been raised to new levels by the advertising of home
health care products. The global oral care market is estimated to exceed $36 billion by 2017. Health and cosmetic
awareness by patients is possibly at an all-time high; the
patients are willing to pay for the best in health products.
This chapter addresses the broad area of home oral hygiene for the child and adolescent, from the biology of
plaque development to plaque removal techniques and
patient motivation. Dental health care professionals need
to make home oral hygiene the core of their preventive
foundation.

MICROBIAL ASPECTS OF ORAL HYGIENE
AND PLAQUE FORMATION
Although Miller proposed, in the late nineteenth century, that microorganisms play a role in dental disease,3
definitive evidence of the microbial etiology of dental
caries and periodontal diseases did not appear until three
fourths of a century later, with the work of Keyes4 and
Löe and colleagues.5 Since these seminal studies, a major
focus of dental research has been to define the specific
microorganisms in dental plaque that mediate these diseases. Although great progress has been made in identifying these pathogens, our primary tools for preventing
dental diseases remain mechanical removal of plaque and
promotion of the remineralization of the tooth surface.
Therefore the following brief review of the timing, mechanisms, and biology of plaque formation provides a scientific rationale for any clinical program of oral hygiene
and prevention.
The development of anaerobic culturing techniques
and, more recently, genetic techniques that allow for the
detection of uncultivable species has identified more than
700 bacterial species and numerous distinct bacterial habitats in the mouth. Interestingly, only limited numbers
of species are found in high numbers in dental plaque.6-8
These species are uniquely suited to this habitat. The formation of plaque on the tooth surface is characterized
by progression from a limited number of pioneer species (mainly streptococci and other gram-positive organisms) to the complex flora of mature dental plaque. This
maturation involves initial adherence of bacteria to the
salivary pellicle and subsequent formation of a complex
multispecies biofilm. Most oral bacteria have evolved specific adherence mechanisms that enable them to colonize
the tooth surface. In addition, bacteria undergo numerous phenotypic changes as they initiate the formation of
a biofilm. The molecular mechanisms that underlie these
processes have been intensively studied. Kolenbrander
and Kuramitsu have provided recent reviews of these areas.8-10 Although their reports offer the possibility of new
methods of plaque control, mechanical plaque removal
with supplementation by chemotherapeutic agents currently offers the most practical method of controlling
plaque.
Not only do microbial changes occur as plaque matures
on the tooth surface but also do mature dental plaques
associated with oral diseases appear to differ from those

n

Mechanical and Chemotherapeutic Home Oral Hygiene

121

associated with oral health. Many studies have demonstrated that, in dental caries, the pathogenicity of plaque
is related to the numbers of mutans streptococci and other
cariogenic species present.11,12 In contrast, the plaques associated with gingival inflammation are characterized by
a predominance of gram-negative bacteria rather than the
predominantly gram-positive flora found in oral health.
This transition seems to coincide with inflammatory
changes that occur at the gingival margin. Culture-independent studies using genetic techniques have expanded
the range of disease-associated bacteria in both dental caries and periodontal diseases.6 Regardless, plaque control
efforts should be directed toward two goals: (1) limiting
the numbers of mutans streptococci and other cariogenic
organisms in dental plaques for the prevention of caries
by mechanical elimination of supragingival plaque and
limitation of dietary sucrose and (2) maintaining the predominantly gram-positive flora associated with gingival
health by mechanical removal of plaque from the subgingival area on a regular basis. The use of chemotherapeutic
agents, particularly chlorhexidine, can also play a role in
the maintenance of gingival health. The incorporation
of these methods into the daily routines of patients and
their parents is perhaps the greatest challenge facing the
dentist.

MECHANICAL METHODS OF PLAQUE
CONTROL
Mechanical methods of plaque control are the most
widely accepted techniques for plaque removal. Toothbrushing and flossing are the essential elements of these
mechanical methods; adjuncts include disclosing agents,
oral irrigators, and tongue scrapers.

MANUAL TOOTHBRUSH
The toothbrush is the most common method for removing plaque from the oral cavity. Several variables enter
into the design and fabrication of toothbrushes, including the bristle material; length, diameter, and total number of fibers; length of brush head; trim design of brush
head; number and arrangement of bristle tufts; angulation of brush head to handle; and handle design. In addition, many features, such as the use of neon colors or
familiar cartoon caricatures, are designed to attract the attention of potential purchasers (Fig. 7-1).

Figure 7-1 Features such as neon colors or cartoon characters on toothbrushes are designed to attract the attention of
purchasers.

122

Chapter 7

n

Mechanical and Chemotherapeutic Home Oral Hygiene

Today most commercially available toothbrushes are
manufactured with synthetic (nylon) bristles. Park and
colleagues identify the bristle and head of the toothbrush
as the most important part of the toothbrush, noting that
the length of most bristles is 11 mm.12a Toothbrushes are
classified as soft, medium, or hard based on the diameter
of these bristles. The diameter ranges for these classifications are 0.16 to 0.22 mm for soft, 0.23 to 0.29 mm for
medium, and 0.30 mm and above for hard. In addition
to the bristle diameter, the bristle end has been studied
to determine the most beneficial type for plaque control.

Of the three types of bristle ends (Figs. 7-2, A-C), coarsecut, enlarged bulbous, and round, the round end is the
bristle type of choice because it is associated with a lower
incidence of gingival tissue irritation. However, even the
coarse-cut bristles round off eventually with normal use
(see Fig. 11-2, D).
The soft brush is preferable for most uses in pediatric
dentistry because of the decreased likelihood of gingival
tissue trauma and increased interproximal cleaning ability. In evaluating the best toothbrush head and handle
for children, Updyke concludes that it is best to use a

A

B

C

D

Figure 7-2 Scanning electron micrographs of toothbrush bristles manufactured by different processes. A, Coarse-cut bristle end,
probably the result of an incomplete single-blade cut. B, Slightly enlarged, bulbous nylon bristle end, resulting from a doubleblade or scissors cut. C, Tapered or round-end nylon toothbrush bristle produced by heat or a mechanical polishing process.
D, Scrubbing, mechanical action of a toothbrush wear machine has rounded off this bristle removed from a brush that was
originally coarse-cut. (From Park KK, Matis BA, Christen AG: Choosing an effective toothbrush, Clin Prev Dent 7:5-10, 1985.)

Chapter 7

n

Mechanical and Chemotherapeutic Home Oral Hygiene

123

Figure 7-4 Several different methods for interproximal

cleaning. Left to right, interdental brush, Y-shaped flossholder, disposable floss-holders, and end-tuft brush.

Figure 7-3 Blue dye in the center bristle tufts of this toothbrush fades down from the end with use. When the dye
reaches the halfway point (bottom), the manufacturer suggests replacing the toothbrush.

t­oothbrush with a smaller head and a thicker handle
than an adult-size toothbrush, for better access to the oral
cavity and to facilitate the child’s grip of the handle.13
However, no single toothbrush design has been scientifically proven to be superior for the removal of plaque,14
although some evidence exists that an angled bristle tuft
configuration is more effective.15,16 Multiple variables influence a toothbrush’s ability to remove plaque; therefore
the practitioner should make recommendations only after assessing a patient’s individual needs.
Wear rates of toothbrush bristles and their subsequent
ability to remove plaque raise another concern. Numerous studies suggest that toothbrushes remain effective
even after wear is noticeable to the patient.17 With time,
of course, there is an inevitable decline in efficiency. Studies suggest that this occurs by the fourth month of continued use, especially at approximal sites.18 The cleansing
effectiveness of toothbrushes is maintained until pronounced toothbrush wear has occurred. This implies that
patients are much more likely to dispose of a brush well
before its clinical usefulness actually ends than to continue to use a toothbrush that no longer cleans ­effectively.
In this regard, one manufacturer claims that its commercial toothbrush (Oral-B Indicator; Oral-B Laboratories,
Inc., Belmont, California, United States) indicates when
the brush should be replaced by means of centrally located tufts of bristles dyed with food colorant. When the

blue band fades to halfway down the bristle, it is time to
replace the brush (Fig. 7-3). The company states that this
occurs, on average, after 3 months, but that the time varies depending on the individual’s brushing habits.
Parents frequently ask how often they should change
a child’s toothbrush. It is best to replace the toothbrush
when it appears well worn. This can present some problems for parents because some children, especially toddlers, chew their brushes when brushing, which rapidly
gives the bristles a well-worn appearance.

FLOSS
Although toothbrushing is the most widely used method
of mechanical plaque control, toothbrushing alone cannot adequately remove plaque from all tooth surfaces. In
particular, it is not efficient in removing interproximal
plaque, which means that interproximal cleaning beyond
brushing is necessary. Many studies have compared the
short-term benefits of flossing and toothbrushing with
those of toothbrushing alone. Surprisingly, these studies show minimal or modest differences between the two
groups in levels of gingival inflammation and new dental
caries.19,20 The short-term nature of most studies limits
their ability to detect differences. However, Corby and
colleagues did find differences in the microbial composition of dental plaques following flossing. After a 2-week
study period of 12- to 21-year-old well-matched twins,
they found that tooth and tongue brushing plus flossing significantly decreased the abundance of microbial
species associated with periodontal disease and dental
caries.21 Many devices have been suggested for the interproximal removal of plaque, such as interdental brushes,
floss-holders and floss, and end-tuft brushes (Fig. 7-4).
According to Mauriello and associates, there appears to
be no substantial difference among these devices in their
ability to remove plaque and their tendency to reduce
gingival inflammation when they are used properly; however, floss is the standard device with which other devices
are most often compared.22 The other devices are more
often recommended in certain unique circumstances; for
example, the interdental brush may be recommended

124

Chapter 7

n

Mechanical and Chemotherapeutic Home Oral Hygiene

Figure 7-6 Floss-threading device with segment of thin floss

attached.

Figure 7-5 Dental floss. Thin (top), tape (middle), and mesh-

work (bottom).

for orthodontic patients. Unfortunately, regular flossing
does not occur daily in most households. Chen and Rubinson demonstrated that daily flossing was practiced by
only 20% of mothers, 12% of fathers, and 6% of children
within families.23 In addition, 28% of mothers, 45% of
fathers, and 48% of children never floss their teeth. Technical difficulties with flossing in children may account for
low compliance.24
Several different types of floss are available: flavored
and unflavored; waxed and unwaxed; and thin, tape,
and meshwork (Super Floss; Oral-B Laboratories, Inc.,
Belmont, California, United States) (Fig. 7-5). Almost all
commercially available floss is made of nylon, although
floss made of Teflon material (polytetrafluoroethylene)
(Glide; W.L. Gore and Associates, Inc., Flagstaff, Arizona,
United States) is also available. The manufacturer claims
that, because the material has a lower coefficient of friction than nylon, this floss does not shred, slides easily
between tight contacts, and minimizes snapping of the
floss.
Based on the work of Bass, unwaxed nylon-filament
floss has generally been considered the floss of choice
because of the ease of passing the floss between tight
­
contacts, the lack of a wax residue, the squeaking sound
produced by moving the floss over a clean tooth, and the
fiber spread, which results in increased surface contact and
greater plaque removal.25
However, more recent work clearly indicates that individual patient needs and preferences should be taken
into account before floss selection recommendations are
made. Clinical studies have shown little difference in
cleaning efficacy, comfort of use, or ease of use among
the available floss types.26,27
With these results in mind, it may help when making floss recommendations to parents for their children
to consider both the parent’s and the child’s preferences
and individual needs. From the perspective of patient acceptance, flavored waxed floss may be most effective. In
addition, many parents complain that their fingers are
too large for their child’s mouth. Floss-holding devices

(see Fig. 11-4) are an excellent alternative for parents
when this complaint is voiced or when the dexterity of
the parent or child prevents handholding of floss. For
orthodontic patients, the use of Super Floss or a flossthreader (Fig. 7-6) helps in negotiating the floss under
the archwires to allow for interproximal cleaning. For
or­thodontic patients, flossing is a tedious process but is
nonetheless essential to the maintenance of oral health.

POWERED MECHANICAL PLAQUE REMOVAL
The use of powered or electric toothbrushes has received
considerable attention since the 1960s. The rationale for using powered brushes is that many patients remove plaque
poorly because they lack adequate manual dexterity to manipulate the brush. The powered brushes should decrease
the need for dexterity by automatically including some
movement of the toothbrush head. However, initial studies into the plaque removal effectiveness of powered toothbrushes failed to demonstrate greater efficacy for powered
than for manual toothbrushes. Although improvement
was seen initially, over time the level of cleaning achieved
with powered toothbrushes declined to the same level as
that obtained with manual toothbrushes. Kerlinger refers
to this as the Hawthorne effect: almost any change or experimental manipulation will induce an improvement in
behavior, apparently because of a novelty effect.28 The
introduction of powered toothbrushes caused an initial
increase in use, and therefore plaque and gingivitis were
controlled. Over time, however, the results were comparable with those achieved with manual toothbrushes.
Use of the latest powered toothbrushes, such as the
Sonicare (Philips Oral Healthcare, Inc., Snoqualmie, Washington, United States) or the Braun Oral-B Kids’ Power
Toothbrush (D10) (Oral-B Laboratories, Inc., Belmont,
California, United States), however, may prove to be more
beneficial than the use of other toothbrushes.
The Sonicare uses sonic technology in the form of
acoustic energy to improve the plaque removal ability of
traditional toothbrush bristles. The brush has an electromagnetic device that drives the bristles’ motions at 261
Hz, or 31,320 brush strokes per minute. Ho and Niederman found that the Sonicare toothbrush was significantly
more effective than the manual toothbrush in reducing
the plaque index, gingival index, percentage of sites that
bled when probed, pocket depth, and total gram-negative

Chapter 7

bacteria in a subgingival plaque sample.29 Nowak and colleagues have demonstrated a 40% improvement in the
debris index component of the Simplified Oral Hygiene
Index in children aged 4 to 9 years who were using the
Braun Oral-B Kids’ Power Toothbrush (D10).30 Studies
by Grossman and Proskin31 and by Jongenelis and Wiedemann32 also compared the effectiveness of electric vs.
manual toothbrushes when the toothbrushes were specifically designed for children. Both studies concluded that
the powered toothbrushes removed significantly more
plaque than the manual toothbrushes for children. Finally,
Heanue and associates performed a meta-analysis showing
that powered toothbrushes with a rotation-oscillation action design removed more plaque and reduced gingivitis
more effectively than manual brushes in both the short
and the long term.33 No other powered toothbrush designs were consistently superior to manual toothbrushes.
Subsequent meta-analyses have continued to demonstrate
a modest superiority of the rotation-oscillation action design, although its clinical significance is unclear.34,35
The Toothbrush Acceptance Program Guidelines of the
American Dental Association (ADA) Council on Scientific
Affairs list several requirements for both manual and powered toothbrushes.36 Perhaps the main difference in requirements for the two is that powered toothbrushes must
have been subjected to an examination by and met the
requirements of an appropriate technical safety laboratory
such as Underwriters Laboratories, Inc., because of their
electrical power supply.
Dentifrices serve multiple functions in oral hygiene
through the inclusion of a variety of agents. They act
as plaque- and stain-removing agents through the use
of abrasives and surfactants. Pleasant flavors and colors
encourage their use. They have tartar control properties because of the addition of pyrophosphates. Finally,

Percentage of children in each age group
(excluding nonrespondents and “do not know”)

Mechanical and Chemotherapeutic Home Oral Hygiene

59

0-2 years
2-4 years
4-6 years

50

44
40
30

30

27

10

29

26
20

20

19
15
9

8

8

4

2
0
No paste

125

dentifrices have anticaries and desensitization properties
through the action of fluoride and other agents. Recently,
numerous toothpastes have been marketed that contain
additional remineralizing agents such as amorphous calcium phosphate-casein phosphopeptide. A growing body
of evidence supports their use, especially in high-risk patients.37,38 A child’s dentifrice should contain fluoride,
rank low in abrasiveness, and carry the ADA seal of acceptance. In 2014 50 different fluoride-containing dentifrices were listed as accepted dental therapeutic products
by the ADA Council on Scientific Affairs. Many of the 50
dentifrices are specifically designed and flavored to appeal
to children.
These formulations are useful because a child is more
likely to practice oral hygiene procedures if the tools to
be used are pleasing. Although the caries-preventive efficacy of fluoride toothpastes in children has been well
documented, the impact of dentifrices on children’s total fluoride intake must be considered. Adair and associates confirmed that children tend to use larger amounts
of dentifrice, brush for a longer period, and rinse and
expectorate less when using a children’s dentifrice than
when using an adult dentifrice.39 Levy and Zarei-M studied toothbrushing habits and quantities of toothpaste
used on toothbrushes in children from birth through 6
years of age. Figure 7-7 shows their results.40 This study
did not quantify the amount of toothpaste, and therefore
of fluoride, ingested from the use of a certain amount of
toothpaste on the brush. However, the investigators suggest that ingestion was likely a substantial source of systemic fluoride for these children during the years when a
risk of dental fluorosis is present. It is interesting to note
that many toothpaste advertisements show children with
large amounts of toothpaste on their brushes. Clearly,
this is not the perception dentists want the public to have
regarding the use of fluoridated toothpastes in young
children.

DENTIFRICES

60

n

 1 4 strip

14

strip

12

to 3 4 strip

Full strip

Amount of toothpaste used per brushing
(full strip equals about 1.0 mg fluoride)

Figure 7-7 Quantity of toothpaste used by children from birth to 6 years of age. (From Levy SM, Zarei-M Z: Evaluation of

fluoride exposures in children, J Dent Child 58:467-473, 1991.)

126

Chapter 7

n

Mechanical and Chemotherapeutic Home Oral Hygiene

Simard and colleagues concluded, from their study of
12- to 24-month-old children, that 20% of the children
ingested more than 0.25 mg of fluoride per day by toothbrushing alone.41 To reduce the chance of dental fluorosis
in children secondary to toothpaste ingestion, they suggested the following. Manufacturers should market a lowfluoride dentifrice for infants or reduce the diameter of
the tube orifice. Parents should be advised to delay the
use of fluoride dentifrices until the child is older than 36
months and to use pea-sized quantities of toothpaste. Pediatricians should take into consideration all sources of
fluoride before prescribing supplements. However, recent
reviews conclude that the relationship between the risk
of fluorosis and toothpaste ingestion has been overestimated.42 Given the benefits of fluoride, the judicious use
of fluoridated toothpaste, even in young children, should
be encouraged.42-44

DISCLOSING AGENTS
To increase the patient’s ability to remove plaque, several agents have been developed to allow for patient visualization of plaque. These include iodine, gentian violet,
erythrosin, basic fuchsin, fast green, food dyes, fluorescein, and a two-tone disclosing agent. Use of these agents
is particularly helpful in teaching children toothbrushing techniques and educating them on the rationale
for oral hygiene. FDC red No. 28 is a plaque-disclosing
agent commonly used either as a liquid to be dabbed
onto the teeth with a cotton swab or in the form of a

chewable tablet (Fig. 7-8). Unfortunately, this dye stains
the oral soft tissues and dental pellicle, as well as the
plaque, leaving an objectionable pink discoloration that
lasts up to several hours after use. Most younger children do not appear to be bothered by the discoloration,
but as children approach adolescence, it can become a
problem. Fluorescein-disclosing agents were developed
to address this problem, because fluorescein is not visible under normal light. Their use, however, does require
special equipment.
In a study by Lim and colleagues, four different techniques were compared for clinically detecting plaque in
patients using different dietary regimens.45 Individuals in
the study population, ranging in age from 18 to 27 years,
had their plaque levels assessed using a caries probe, a
plaque-detection probe, erythrosin, and a two-tone disclosing agent at 3, 6, and 18 hours after their teeth had
been thoroughly cleaned. Thirty-eight patients were assigned to a sucrose-restricted (SR) diet in the first part of
the study and thirty-two to a sucrose-supplemented (SS)
diet in the second part of the study. At 3 hours, plaque
was detectable on more than 12% of sites in those consuming the SR diet and up to 23% in those on the SS diet.
After 18 hours the proportion of plaque-covered surfaces
had increased to between 52% (SR diet) and 73% (SS
diet). For minimal amounts of plaque, the disclosing
solutions were found to be the most sensitive assessment
techniques. For moderate and abundant plaque deposits,
however, the probe techniques were more sensitive.

A

B

C

D

Figure 7-8 Plaque-disclosing procedure. A, Two common forms of FDC red No. 28 disclosing agent: a liquid that is dabbed on
with a cotton swab and a chewable tablet. B, Mixed dentition in a patient before oral hygiene and use of a disclosing agent.
C, Patient before oral hygiene but after use of a disclosing agent. D, Patient after oral hygiene and use of a disclosing agent.

Chapter 7

The clinical significance of these data is that, in measuring a patient’s oral hygiene abilities, one must assess
plaque deposits immediately after the patient has cleaned
his or her teeth. Otherwise, allowances must be made
for factors such as the time elapsed since the teeth were
cleaned and the patient’s diet. If a patient is seen several
hours after the teeth have been cleaned, the quality of
plaque control may be deemed unsatisfactory regardless of
the quality of the patient’s performance. Disclosing agents
can be valuable adjuncts for both clinical and at home use.

OTHER ADJUNCTS FOR PLAQUE CONTROL
Several other devices, such as oral irrigators and tongue
scrapers, have been suggested for routine oral hygiene.
Oral irrigators use pulsed water or chemotherapeutic
agents to dislodge plaque from the dentition. Tongue
scrapers, which are flat, flexible plastic sticks, are used to
remove bacterial and food deposits that accumulate within the rough dorsal surface of the tongue. In addition,
gauze or special dental washcloths are useful in infants
to massage the gums and to remove plaque on newly
erupted teeth. Although these adjuncts add to our basic
hygiene tools, toothbrushes and floss remain the most effective means of mechanical plaque removal. Professional
recommendation of these adjuncts should be to suggest
them as supplements to and not substitutes for the basic
tools and should take into consideration the patient’s and
caregiver’s individual needs, abilities, and preferences.

n

Mechanical and Chemotherapeutic Home Oral Hygiene

127

in the long axis of the teeth. The brush is placed at the
mucogingival line, with the bristles pointed away from
the crown, and moved with a stroking motion along the
gingiva and the tooth surface. The handle is rotated toward the crown and vibrated as the brush is moved.
Anaise concluded that the horizontal scrubbing method exhibited a more significant plaque-removing effect
than the roll, Charters, and modified Stillman methods.46
This finding supports the work done by McClure48 and by
Sangnes and colleagues.49
The horizontal scrub technique removes as much or
more plaque than the other techniques, regardless of the
child’s age and whether the brushing is performed by
the parent or the child. In addition, it is the technique
most naturally adopted by children. Therefore in most
situations the horizontal scrubbing method can be recommended for brushing children’s teeth, regardless of the
brushing method.50 By following a systematic approach,
as shown in Figure 7-9, the child or parent can help ensure

TECHNIQUES
As with toothbrush design, several different types of toothbrushing techniques for children have been advocated over
the years. The more predominant techniques are the roll
method, the Charters method, the horizontal scrubbing
method, and the modified Stillman method.46 Anaise, in his
study of the effectiveness of these four techniques in children from 11 to 14 years of age, describes them as follows.47

Roll Method
The brush is placed in the vestibule, the bristle ends directed
apically, with the sides of the bristles touching the gingival tissue. The patient exerts lateral pressure on the sides of
the bristles, and the brush is moved occlusally. The brush is
placed again high in the vestibule, and the rolling motion
is repeated. The lingual surfaces are brushed in the same
manner, with two teeth brushed simultaneously.

Charters Method
The ends of the bristles are placed in contact with the enamel of the teeth and the gingiva, with the bristles pointed at
about a 45° angle toward the plane of occlusion. A lateral
and downward pressure is then placed on the brush, and the
brush is vibrated gently back and forth a millimeter or so.

Horizontal Scrubbing Method
The brush is placed horizontally on buccal and lingual surfaces and moved back and forth with a scrubbing motion.

Modified Stillman Method
The modified Stillman method combines a vibratory action of the bristles with a stroke movement of the brush

Figure 7-9 Systematic approach to brushing the teeth begins

with the buccal aspects of the teeth in the maxillary right
quadrant and follows the arrows. Bristles are held at 45° to
the long axis of the teeth and are directed to the gum line.
Short back-and-forth strokes are used, allowing bristles to
remain in the same place. The handle of the brush is placed
parallel to the biting surfaces except when one is brushing
the lingual aspects of the anterior teeth and the posterior
aspects of the last tooth in each quadrant, when a heel-toe
direction of brushing is used. (Courtesy of Dr. Paul Starkey.)

128

Chapter 7

n

Mechanical and Chemotherapeutic Home Oral Hygiene

that all areas of the mouth are cleaned. Notice also on this
figure the positioning of the brush head on the lingual
surfaces of the anterior teeth and on the distal aspect of
the most posterior tooth in each quadrant.
For flossing, the following technique is recommended
(Fig. 7-10):
1.	A 46- to 61-cm (18- to 24-inch) length of floss is
obtained, and the ends are wrapped around the
patient’s or parent’s middle fingers. Floss should be
long enough to allow the thumbs to touch each other
when the hands are laid flat.
2.	The thumbs and index fingers are used to guide the
floss as it is gently “sawed” between the two teeth to
be cleaned. Care must be taken not to snap the floss
down through the interproximal contacts, to avoid
gingival trauma.
3.	The floss is then manipulated into a C shape around
each tooth and moved in a cervical-occlusal reciprocating motion until the plaque is removed. In
between the cleaning of each pair of teeth, the floss
is repositioned on the fingers so that fresh, unsoiled
floss is used at each new location.
  
Learning a flossing technique is difficult and takes
some practice. Some children and their parents prefer
to make a loop of floss. Tying the two ends of the floss

together, instead of wrapping it around their fingers, assists them in holding and controlling the floss. However,
Rodrigues and colleagues demonstrated that, even when
the looped floss technique is used, a training program is
required for children from 6½ to 7½ years of age if a significant reduction is to be achieved in proximal surface
dental plaque indices.51

VISUAL-MOTOR SKILL MASTERY
Several attempts have been made to develop specific recommendations for when children can begin performing
oral hygiene procedures themselves with adequate effectiveness. Terhune stated that the variables of age, gender,
and eye-hand coordination could not precisely predict
when particular children were ready to learn an effective
dental flossing technique.52 However, all 8- to 11-year-old
children in his study learned how to use dental floss effectively within 10 days. Mescher and associates found
that hand function was an age-related factor in children’s
ability to perform sulcular toothbrushing, but that hand
function test scores were not accurate predictors of an individual’s toothbrushing ability.53
Preisch, however, using a visual-motor integration
developmental test, did find a significant relationship
between developmental age and oral hygiene scores.54

A

B

C

D

Figure 7-10 Flossing technique. A, The length of floss is wrapped around the middle fingers of each hand. B, Enough floss
should be left between the middle fingers to allow the thumbs to touch when the hands are laid flat. C, The index fingers and
thumbs are used to manipulate the floss. D, The floss is carefully placed in a C shape between the interproximal contacts and
gently “sawed” up and down until each tooth surface is clean.

Chapter 7

Significant correlations were shown between the children’s ability to copy geometric forms and their academic
achievement and motor skill level. Higher levels of thinking and behavior require integration among sensory inputs and motor action. A child can have well-developed
visual and motor skills but may be unable to coordinate
the two. Although both chronologic and developmental
ages were found to be predictors of plaque removal ability, only developmental age demonstrated statistically
significant predictive power. Because of the complexity
of this test, however, we are left without a practical method for making recommendations to parents as to when
their child can begin brushing unsupervised. As Preisch
laments, many dentists use anecdotal accounts and tell
parents to supervise their children’s brushing until the
children can color within the lines, tie their own shoelaces, or cut through a tough piece of meat.54 However,
this may still be our best practical recommendation.

TIME CONSIDERATIONS
Another of the important questions regarding home oral
health care involves time considerations in oral hygiene
practices. How often and for how long should patients brush
and floss their teeth? In discussing frequency of oral hygiene
procedures, Löe suggests that oral cleanliness should be regarded as a defined state in which all surfaces of all teeth are
plaque-free.55 He states that it may not be surprising to find
that complete removal of plaque once daily or every second
day, or possibly even once every third day, is more valuable in preventing dental disease than performing two or
three inadequate brushings per day. Indeed, Lang and colleagues observed that completion of effective oral hygiene
procedures at intervals of up to 48 hours is compatible with
gingival health.56 Studies addressing the relation between
the frequency of hygiene procedures and caries experience
in children have yielded inconclusive results.
In addition to optimal brushing frequency, the most
efficacious length of brushing time has been investigated.
In a study by Hodges and colleagues, 84 children from 5
to 15 years of age brushed their teeth with a fluoridated
dentifrice for 30, 60, 120, or 180 seconds.57 The results of
the study suggested that, statistically, a 1-minute brushing period provides the greatest plaque removal benefit
of all time periods tested. Indeed, Honkala and colleagues
concluded that time spent toothbrushing was more important than the frequency of brushing.58
The following recommendations are made based
on the preceding information. In children, thorough
oral hygiene procedures should be performed at least
once daily, preferably twice, with parental supervision.
Teeth should be brushed for at least 1 minute with a
fluoridated dentifrice; flossing and other plaque removal activities are added to this time. If oral hygiene is
accomplished only once per day, it should be the last
thing the child does before bedtime at night. Because
the flow of saliva and its buffering capacity are reduced
during sleep, it is advantageous to remove plaque before
bedtime. In addition, the development in children of
a learned behavior performed at a specific time of day,
each and every day, will be helpful throughout childhood and into adulthood.

n

Mechanical and Chemotherapeutic Home Oral Hygiene

129

CHEMOTHERAPEUTIC PLAQUE CONTROL
Although the use of mechanical therapy for plaque control can provide excellent results, it is clear that many
patients are unable, unwilling, or untrained to practice
routine effective mechanotherapy. In addition, certain patients with dental diseases (e.g., periodontitis) or medical
diseases (e.g., immunocompromised conditions) require
additional assistance beyond mechanotherapy to maintain a normal state of oral health. Because of this, chemotherapeutic agents have been developed as adjuncts in
plaque control.
Van der Ouderaa has stated that the ideal chemotherapeutic plaque control agent should have the following
characteristics59:
  
•	Specificity only for the pathogenic bacteria
•	Substantivity—the ability to attach to and be retained
by oral surfaces and then be released over time without loss of potency
•	Chemical stability during storage
•	Absence of adverse reactions, such as staining or mucosal interactions
•	Toxicologic safety
•	Ecologic safety so as not to alter the microbiotic flora
adversely
•	Ease of use
  
No agent has yet been developed that has all of these
characteristics.
There are several main routes of administration of antiplaque agents designed for home use. They are mouthwashes, dentifrices, gels, irrigators, floss, chewing gum,
lozenges, and capsules. All of these are designed for local, supragingival administration, except the irrigator and
capsule delivery methods. The irrigators can provide both
supragingival and subgingival delivery. The capsules are
designed for systemic distribution.
Both van der Ouderaa,59 Mandel,60 and Gunsolley61
provided excellent reviews of the various chemotherapeutic agents and their uses. Box 7-1 is adapted from those
reviews. Space does not allow for a complete discussion
of the agents listed in this box; however, a few pertinent
subjects are addressed. Recent systematic reviews provide
additional insight into the effectiveness of chemotherapeutic agents, their mechanisms of action, and their suitability for clinical practice.61-63

ANTISEPTIC AGENTS
The antiseptic agents used in chemotherapeutic plaque
control have been shown to exhibit little or no oral or
systemic toxicity in the concentrations used. Virtually no
drug resistance is induced, and in most instances these
agents have a broad antimicrobial spectrum. Chlorhexidine, a positively charged organic antiseptic agent, has
received considerable attention and study because of its
ability to reduce plaque and gingivitis scores. It has strong
substantivity, binding well to many sites in the oral cavity and maintaining an ongoing antibacterial presence.
Chlorhexidine binds with anionic glycoproteins and
phosphoproteins on the buccal, palatal, and labial mucosa, and the tooth-borne pellicle. Its antibacterial effects
include binding well to bacterial cell membranes, increasing

130

Chapter 7

n

Mechanical and Chemotherapeutic Home Oral Hygiene

1.0

Box 7-1
Chemotherapeutic Plaque Control Agents
Positively Charged Organic Molecules: Quaternary
ammonium compounds—cetylpyridinium chloride
Pyrimidines—hexedine
Bis-biguanides—chlorhexidine, alexidine
Noncharged Phenolic Agents: Listerine (thymol, eucalyptol, menthol, and methylsalicylate), triclosan, phenol,
and thymol
Oxygenating Agents: Peroxides and perborate
Bis-Pyridines: Octenidine
Halogens: Iodine, iodophors, and fluorides
Heavy Metal Salts: Silver, mercury, zinc, copper, and tin
ANTIBIOTICS

Niddamycin, kanamycin sulfate, tetracycline hydrochloride, and vancomycin hydrochloride
ENZYMES

Mucinases, pancreatin, fungal enzymes, and protease
PLAQUE-MODIFYING AGENTS

Urea peroxide

GI

ANTISEPTIC AGENTS

0.5

49.5%
*
80.4%
*
A

B

66.6%
*

C

D

*P  0.05
Figure 7-11 Mean gingival index (GI) in four groups of

schoolchildren rinsing with chlorhexidine digluconate
(CHX) or placebo solution for 6 months under supervision.
Clear bars, before treatment; screened bars, after treatment.
Group A, 0.2% CHX 6 times weekly; group B, 0.2% CHX 2
times weekly; group C, 0.1% CHX 6 times weekly; group D,
placebo 6 times weekly. (From Lang NP et al: Effects of supervised chlorhexidine mouthrinses in children, J Periodontal
Res 17:101-111, 1982.)

SUGAR SUBSTITUTES

Xylitol, mannitol
PLAQUE ATTACHMENT INTERFERENCE AGENTS

Sodium polyvinylphosphonic acid, perfluoroalkyl

their permeability, initiating leakage, and precipitating
intracellular components.
An abundance of clinical trials supports its efficacy
in reducing plaque and gingivitis scores in conjunction
with routine oral hygiene. Van Strydonck and colleagues
recently reviewed 30 clinical trials comparing the use of
chlorhexidine mouthrinses with that of placebo/control
mouthrinses or oral hygiene for greater than 4 weeks. Metaanalysis of studies with a low risk of author-estimated bias
showed a 33% reduction in plaque with chlorhexidine
and a 26% reduction in gingivitis relative to control. CHX
rinsing groups did show higher levels of staining.64 Clinical trials specifically targeting children have also shown
significant reductions in plaque and gingivitis scores.65,66
The benefits of chlorhexidine mouthrinses and varnishes
with respect to caries prevention are inconclusive, especially
in children with regular fluoride exposure.67,68 Children
with low fluoride exposure may benefit from chlorhexidine varnish application (Fig. 7-11).67
Chlorhexidine spray has stimulated interest regarding
its use in populations with disabilities because of its effectiveness and ease of administration. Burtner and colleagues demonstrated a 35% reduction in plaque levels
with use of the spray compared with placebo use in a
study of 16 institutionalized adult males with severe and
profound mental retardation.69 Chikte and colleagues
conducted a 9-week, double-blind, randomized, crossover
clinical trial involving 52 institutionalized individuals
from 10 to 26 years of age and with mental disabilities. By

the end of the trial, plaque and gingival indices had been
reduced by 48% and 52%, respectively, in the group treated with a stannous fluoride spray.70 In the group treated
with chlorhexidine spray, reductions in plaque and gingival indices were 75% and 78%, respectively.
In addition to its use in institutionalized patients with
mental retardation, chlorhexidine has been studied for
its use in immunocompromised patients. Clinical trials
of its efficacy in preventing or ameliorating oral mucositis have produced conflicting results.71,72 A recent evidence-based analysis suggested that the evidence for its
use in immunocompromised children for the prevention
of mucositis is equivocal, and therefore its use could not
be recommended.73 The use of positively charged antiplaque agents has been hampered by adverse reactions
such as staining of teeth, impaired taste sensation, and
increased supragingival calculus formation. Different
attempts have been made to decrease these side effects,
such as alteration of dietary habits, increase in mechanical plaque removal efforts, and use of hydrogen peroxide
solutions in conjunction with the antiseptic agent. Continued research is needed to find methods to limit these
adverse reactions.
The most widely known noncharged phenolic antiseptic agent is Listerine (Pfizer Warner Lambert Division,
Morris Plains, New Jersey, United States). It has demonstrated a long history of efficacy and was among the original antiseptic agents studied by W.D. Miller in 1890.3 In
addition, it was the first over-the-counter mouthrinse to
be accepted by the ADA Council on Dental Therapeutics
for its help in controlling plaque and gingivitis.36 Despite
its long history of use, most studies have shown chlorhexidine to be significantly more effective than Listerine in
reducing plaque and gingivitis indices.61-63 Listerine tends
to give patients a burning sensation, and it has a bitter

Chapter 7

Mechanical and Chemotherapeutic Home Oral Hygiene

n

131

2

PLI

GI

2

1

1

0

0

0

A

7

Days

14

0

21

Days

0.12% CHX
Sanguinarine
0.075% CPC

Placebo
Listerine

0.12% CHX
Sanguinarine
0.075% CPC

7

B

14

21
Placebo
Listerine

DI

2

1

0

14

C

0

7
Days

0.12% CHX
Sanguinarine
0.075% CPC

14

21
Placebo
Listerine

Figure 7-12 Mean indices in five groups of eight individuals refraining from oral hygiene for 21 days and rinsing with 0.12%

chlorhexidine digluconate (CHX), 0.075% cetylpyridinium chloride (CPC), Listerine, sanguinarine, or placebo. A, Mean plaque
index (PLI). B, Mean gingival index (GI). C, Mean discoloration index (DI). (From Lang NP, Brecx MC: Chlorhexidine digluconate: an agent for chemical plaque control and prevention of gingival inflammation, J Periodontal Res 16 [Suppl 21]:74-89,
1986.)
taste. Lang and Brecx have summarized the changes in
plaque index, gingival index, and discoloration index
scores resulting from the use of four well-known chemotherapeutic plaque control agents (Fig. 7-12).74 The effects
of two daily 10-mL rinses with 0.12% chlorhexidine digluconate, the quaternary ammonium compound cetylpyridinium chloride, the phenolic compound Listerine,
or the plant alkaloid sanguinarine were compared with
those of rinses with a placebo. All rinses were supervised

by registered dental hygienists during these 21-day studies. The participants were divided into five groups of eight
individuals each and were instructed to refrain from oral
hygiene during the 21 days. Although the sanguinarine,
Listerine, and cetylpyridinium chloride inhibited plaque
formation to some extent, they did not prevent gingivitis
significantly more than did the placebo. The chlorhexidine, however, maintained the preexperimental gingival
index scores throughout the 21 days. Unfortunately, all of

132

Chapter 7

n

Mechanical and Chemotherapeutic Home Oral Hygiene

the antiseptics demonstrated higher discoloration index
scores than the placebo. As can be seen in Figure 11-12, C,
chlorhexidine had the second highest discoloration score
of the four agents. Not surprisingly, studies have shown
improvement in plaque and gingivitis when antiseptic
rinses are used in conjunction with dentifrices compared
with dentifrice use alone.75,76
Listerine has one of the highest alcohol contents of
any mouthwash at approximately 25%. The alcohol content of some mouthwashes has been the cause for some
concern. Although the development of oral and pharyngeal cancer with long-term mouthwash use has been
investigated, alcohol intoxication is more relevant to pediatric dentistry. In addition, the relationship of alcoholcontaining mouthwashes to oral carcinomas is equivocal.
Alcohol intoxication of children and adolescents from
mouthwashes is a concern because of the products’ availability. Most parents do not recognize the potential harm
from these rinses. Selbst and associates reported the case
of a 4-year-old boy who died after consuming approximately 12 ounces of a 10% alcohol mouthwash.77 They
advocated for stronger legislation that would restrict the
level of alcohol in substances that might be available to
children and for continued education of practitioners and
parents regarding the potential lethality of most mouthwashes so that accidental ingestions are prevented. One
consumer advocacy group states that it is inconsistent
for cough and cold products with 12% alcohol to have
child-resistant tops when some mouthwashes with even
higher alcohol content have “designer” shot-glass tops.
The ADA Council on Dental Therapeutics requires any
mouthrinses that carry the ADA seal of acceptance and
contain more than 5% ethyl alcohol to be packaged in
bottles with child-resistant caps. Since 1995 such products in the United States have been legally required to
have child-resistant packaging, with a documented reduction in these events.78
Chitosans are another cationic antimicrobial finding
their way into oral health care. They are derived from the
shells of shrimp and other crustaceans and appear to reduce biofilm viability.79
A few comments regarding the use of fluoride as a halogen antiseptic plaque control agent are appropriate here,
although its use in dentistry is discussed in other portions
of the text. The fluoride ion inhibits the carbohydrate
use of oral organisms by blocking enzymes involved in
the glycolytic pathway; however, at preventive-use levels it probably does not alter the plaque ecosystem. As
mentioned earlier, stannous fluoride can produce reductions in plaque and gingivitis scores approaching those of
chlorhexidine, but this effect is caused by the tin content
of this salt, not the fluoride content. It is interesting to
note that two antiseptic agents, chlorhexidine and triclosan, have been incorporated into dentifrice formulations.67

ENZYMES, PLAQUE-MODIFYING AGENTS, AND
PLAQUE ATTACHMENT INTERFERENCE AGENTS
Enzyme systems intended to alter plaque architecture and
adherence, as well as enzymes designed to generate antibacterial products, have been investigated. However, problems

associated with the long-term stability of enzyme molecules in environments with potentially high concentrations of alcohol or surfactants have yet to be addressed. The
use of urea peroxide as a plaque-modifying agent has been
investigated because of its increased stability over hydrogen
peroxide and the protein denaturation effect of urea. Only
limited success has been demonstrated. The use of agents
designed to interfere with the initial adherence of bacteria
to the salivary pellicle or the subsequent accumulation by
growth and interbacterial adherence seems encouraging.
Delmopinol, derived from orpholinoethanol, exerts its effects by binding to salivary proteins and altering the cohesive and adhesive properties of the films formed.
Although these areas may hold promise for future chemotherapeutic control of plaque, additional research is
needed.

SUGAR SUBSTITUTES
The use of sugar substitutes such as xylitol, mannitol,
sucralose, and aspartame has been advocated. Although
Park and colleagues have shown that sugar substitutes can
have a positive influence on plaque pH, the intrinsic antiplaque activity is much lower than that of other plaque
control agents.80 These agents have been suggested for
use in chewing gum to decrease plaque accumulation and
pH. Advocating the use of chewing gum as a preventive
technique is not without controversy, however. Hoerman
and colleagues demonstrated that, in a no-oral-hygiene
environment, plaque accumulation was lower when gum
with sucrose or sorbitol was chewed than when gum was
not chewed.81 In addition, Isokangas and associates carried out a 2-year study of 11- and 12-year-old children
with moderate and decreasing caries prevalence.82 They
demonstrated that the combination of xylitol gum chewing and fluoride use resulted in a significantly lower incidence of caries than that achieved with fluoride use alone.
Research into the use of sugar substitutes as plaque control agents continues.83
One final comment is in order. Because of conflicting
results published on the effectiveness of the commercially
available prebrushing rinse containing sodium benzoate,
it is not included in the list of chemotherapeutic plaque
control agents. In addition, it is not accepted by the ADA.
O’Mullane suggests that the positive results found for this
prebrushing rinse may stem purely from the advantage
of rinsing with water before brushing.84 The idea of using
water to help remove plaque is not new. The “swish-andswallow” method of removing material from the mouth
immediately after eating in circumstances where brushing is impractical has been advocated for a long time.
Ciancio recommends that, when a product is selected for
a patient, consideration be given to necessity, efficacy, adverse effects, and cost-effectiveness.85

AGE-SPECIFIC HOME ORAL HYGIENE
INSTRUCTIONS
The appropriateness and effectiveness of home oral hygiene procedures change throughout childhood. Specific
age-related home oral hygiene recommendations are described in the following sections. It is necessary to involve

Chapter 7

the parent at some level in the oral hygiene procedure for
each of the age categories.

PRENATAL COUNSELING
The best time to begin counseling parents and establishing a child’s dental preventive program is actually before
the birth of the child. This is beneficial for numerous
reasons. For an expectant couple, particularly if the child
is their first, this is a time in their lives when they are
most receptive to preventive health recommendations.
These parents-to-be become acutely aware of their child’s
dependence on them for all nurturing and health care
needs. Parents have a strong instinct to provide the best
that they can for their child. Counseling them on their
own hygiene habits and the effect they can have on their
children as role models will aid in improving both the
parents’ and the child’s oral health. Discussing pregnancy
gingivitis with the mother-to-be and dispelling some of
the myths about childbirth and dental health can be beneficial. In addition, a review of infant dental care is useful
for the expectant parents.

INFANTS (BIRTH TO 1 YEAR OLD)
It is important that a few basic home oral hygiene procedures begin during the child’s first year of life. There is
general agreement that plaque removal activities should
begin when the first primary teeth erupt. Some practi­
tioners recommend cleaning and massaging of the gums
before this, to help in establishing a healthy oral flora and
to aid in teething. This early cleaning must be done totally by the parent. It can be accomplished by wrapping
a moistened gauze square or washcloth around the finger
and gently massaging the teeth and gingival tissues. The
child can be positioned in numerous ways during this
procedure, but cradling the child with one arm while massaging the teeth with the hand of the other may be the
simplest and provides the infant with a strong sense of
security (Fig. 7-13). This procedure should be performed

Figure 7-13 Arm-cradled position of child for effective

cleansing of the oral cavity. This figure shows the use of a
gauze square for wiping the child’s dentition and gingival
tissues.

n

Mechanical and Chemotherapeutic Home Oral Hygiene

133

once daily. Generally, other plaque removal techniques
are not necessary. The introduction of a moistened, softbristled, child- or infant-sized toothbrush during this age
is advisable only if the parent feels comfortable using the
brush. The use of a dentifrice is neither necessary nor
advised, as the foaming action of the paste tends to be
objectionable to the infant. Because fluoride ingestion is
possible, however, use of a nonfluoridated tooth and gum
cleanser may be beneficial.
The child’s first visit to the dentist should take place
during this period. The American Academy of Pediatric
Dentistry recommends that parents or caregivers establish
a dental home for infants by 12 months of age.86 When
the child has special dental needs, such as medical problems or trauma, this visit can be sooner. Several objectives
are accomplished at this visit. Certainly, instruction of
the parents in the use of the oral hygiene practices mentioned herein is necessary. In addition, an infant dental
examination and fluoride status review should be accomplished, dietary issues related to nursing and bottle caries,
as well as other health concerns, should be addressed,
anticipatory guidance should be provided, and caries
risk assessment should be accomplished. These subjects
are discussed in more detail in other sections of this text.
These first dental visits are also a time for the child to
become familiar with the dental environment and the
dental staff and the dentist, which makes any future
dental treatment less anxiety-provoking.

TODDLERS (1 TO 3 YEARS OLD)
During “toddlerhood,” the toothbrush should be introduced into the plaque removal procedure if this was
not accomplished previously. Because of the inability of
children in this age group to expectorate and because of
the potential for fluoride ingestion, careful and minimal
(a “smear” of toothpaste on the brush) introduction of
fluoridated dentifrice can be used in 2- and 3-year-olds.
Most children enjoy imitating their parents and will readily practice toothbrushing. Adequate plaque removal is
not usually accomplished by the child alone, however.
Although the child should be encouraged to begin rudimentary brushing, the parent remains the primary caregiver in these hygiene procedures. The use of additional
instruments for plaque control is generally unnecessary,
although flossing may be needed if any interproximal
contacts are closed. The use of a flossing aid may also be
indicated.
Positioning of the child and parent is again important. Although most children enjoy brushing their own
teeth, many are resistant to allowing anyone else to do
the brushing. Several positions can be used by the parent, but the lap-to-lap position, as shown in Figure 7-14,
allows one adult to control the child’s body movements
while the other adult brushes the teeth. Notice how the
child’s arms and legs are controlled with the hands and
elbows of the adult responsible for body movements. The
parents should be encouraged to make this a special time
for the child and to praise the child as much as possible.
For single-parent households, a one-adult position often
becomes necessary. In this situation the parent sits on the
floor with his or her legs stretched out in front, and the

134

Chapter 7

n

Mechanical and Chemotherapeutic Home Oral Hygiene

child is positioned between the legs. The child’s head is
placed between the thighs of the parent, with the child’s
arms and legs carefully controlled by the legs of the parent. This position is a little awkward, but for a young child
resistant to oral hygiene, it does allow these procedures to
be accomplished.

PRESCHOOLERS (3 TO 6 YEARS OLD)
Although children in the preschool age range begin to
demonstrate significant improvements in their ability to
manipulate the toothbrush, it is still the responsibility
of the parent to be the primary provider of oral hygiene

Figure 7-14 Lap-to-lap position of child. Two adults sit with

knees touching, using their laps as a table on which to rest
the child. The adult on the right holds the child’s legs and
arms, while the adult on the left performs the oral hygiene
procedures.

Figure 7-15 Only a smear of fluoride toothpaste (size of

a rice grain, left) should be used for children under age 3
years of age, and no more than a pea size of fluoride toothpaste should be used for children from 3 to 6 years of age
(right).

­ rocedures. All too often, parents of these children feel
p
that the child has adequately achieved the skills necessary
to clean the teeth. It is important to stress to the parents
that they must continue to brush their child’s teeth. Although fluoride ingestion remains a concern for this age
group, during this time, most children develop the skills
to expectorate toothpaste adequately. Until this occurs, it
is important for parents to use only a pea-sized amount of
toothpaste on the child’s brush (Fig. 7-15). In addition, it
is during this age that flossing is most likely to begin. As
mentioned previously, if the interproximal contacts are
closed, the parent must begin flossing procedures. In the
primary dentition, the posterior contacts may be the only
areas where flossing is needed. The closure of the spaces
between the primary molars tends to occur somewhere
near the start of this age range. If any interproximal area
has tooth-to-tooth contact, however, daily flossing of that
area becomes necessary.
Proper positioning of the child continues to be useful
for this age group in performing oral hygiene. One method advocated is that in which the parent stands behind
the child and both face the same direction. The child rests
his or her head back into the parent’s nondominant arm.
With the hand of this arm, the parent can retract the
child’s cheeks and use the other hand to brush. This position is also appropriate for flossing. To brush their child’s
teeth, many parents use a frontal approach, which is awkward and provides little head support. This positioning
technique should be discouraged.
It is also during this stage that fluoride gels and rinses
for home use may be introduced. Because of the risk of
ingestion, however, these agents should be used in small
quantities, and their use should be limited to those patients demonstrating a moderate to high risk of caries.
The use of other chemotherapeutic plaque control agents
is generally not recommended.

SCHOOL-AGED CHILDREN (6 TO 12 YEARS OLD)
The 6- to 12-year stage is marked by acceptance of increasing responsibilities by the children. The need to assume
responsibility for homework and household chores tends
to occur during this time. In addition, the child can begin
to assume more responsibility for oral hygiene. Parental
involvement is still needed. However, instead of performing the oral hygiene, parents can switch to active supervision. By the second half of this stage, most children can
provide their basic oral hygiene (brushing and flossing).
Parents may find they need to brush or floss their child’s
teeth only in certain difficult-to-reach areas of the mouth
or if there is a compliance problem. Parents do need to
actively inspect their child’s teeth for cleanliness on a
regular basis. One helpful adjunct is the use of a disclosing agent. After the child has brushed, flossed, and used
the disclosing agent on his or her teeth, the parent can
easily visualize any remaining plaque and assist the child
in removing it.
By this age, ingestion of fluoridated materials, such as
dentifrices, gels, or rinses, is not as pronounced a concern because these children are able to expectorate well.
Certainly the use of fluoridated dentifrices is essential;
however, fluoridated gels and rinses can be reserved for

Chapter 7

those children at risk for caries. In addition, the use of
chlorhexidine or Listerine can be introduced to those at
risk for periodontal disease and caries, although some
children who might benefit from these chemotherapeutic
agents will find their use objectionable.
Because early treatment of malocclusions has increased, this age group has undergone more of this treatment and experienced its accompanying increased risk
for caries and periodontal disease. Special attention to
oral hygiene is necessary for these patients. Increased frequency and adequacy of brushing and flossing become
necessary. Although fluoridated dentifrices provide costefficient fluoride exposure, the use of fluoridated gels or
rinses is strongly encouraged. In addition, as with other
patients at risk for caries and periodontal disease, the use
of chemotherapeutic agents and adjuncts such as oral
irrigators is recommended. Feil and colleagues published
an interesting study on the intentional use of the Hawthorne effect to improve oral hygiene compliance in
orthodontic patients.87 Forty adolescent orthodontic patients with histories of poor oral hygiene were assigned
to one of two groups. Those in the experimental group
were presented with a situation that stimulated participation in an experiment, whereas the control individuals
had no knowledge of study participation. Although there
were no statistically significant differences between the
control and the experimental groups at baseline, those
in the experimental group showed significantly lower
plaque scores at 3 months and again at 6 months. The
experimental participants had significantly improved oral
hygiene, which suggests that the Hawthorne effect (participating in an “experimental study”) caused the adolescent patients to pay more attention to oral hygiene and
therefore to do a better job.

ADOLESCENTS (12 TO 19 YEARS OLD)
Although the adolescent patient usually has developed
the skills for adequate oral hygiene procedures, compliance is a major problem during this age period. Griffen
and Goepferd point out that motivating an adolescent
to assume responsibility for personal oral hygiene may
be complicated by reactions of rebellion against external authority and some incapacity to appreciate longterm consequences.88 Macgregor and Balding’s survey of
4075 children 14 years old suggests a positive relationship
between self-esteem and toothbrushing behavior and
motivation for mouth care in adolescents.89 Because selfesteem declines between the ages of 11 and 14 and then
shows a gradual improvement into adulthood, it is not
hard to understand why plaque control in these patients
declines. In addition, poor dietary habits and pubertal
hormonal changes increase adolescents’ risk for caries
and gingival inflammation.
Therefore it is important for practitioners and parents
to continue to help and guide adolescents as they progress
through this difficult stage. Stressing the children’s increased responsibility as young adults without appearing
authoritarian can aid them in accepting their new role.
The parents must be ready to adapt to their child’s changing personality and to continue to reinforce the need for
oral health care and hygiene. Increasing the adolescents’

n

Mechanical and Chemotherapeutic Home Oral Hygiene

135

knowledge regarding plaque control and oral diseases, as
well as appealing to their appearance, may also help in
motivating these patients.

IN-OFFICE ORAL HYGIENE PROGRAMS
Preventive dentistry is the foundation on which all oral
health care must be built. In establishing this foundation
for their patients, practitioners must first look at themselves and their office environment. Each practice must
establish a preventive philosophy that is evident throughout the patient’s encounter with the dental office. This
means that the dentist, the staff, and the practice systems
and design must reflect this concept. All staff members
must have a personal understanding and appreciation of
the importance of this basic concept. This must be evident in their personal hygiene and in their routine interactions with patients.
After this introspective look and adjustment the practitioner can turn to the patient directly. Ong discusses several
basic concepts for developing a plaque control program in
the dental office.90 Gathering information from the child
and parent is necessary for the practitioner to understand
their concerns and to let them know that he or she understands these concerns. By discussing the patient’s and
parents’ needs, and listening to and observing their reactions, the practitioner can gauge their readiness to begin
the plaque control program. Dental education of the parent
and child should be accomplished next, with tailoring
to the patient’s individual problem. Describing exactly
why oral hygiene is important in the patient’s particular
case can help with motivation. The information should
be delivered in simple terms and with enthusiasm and
conviction. It also needs to be conveyed to the child in
age-appropriate language.
When specific age-appropriate oral hygiene instructions are given, it is important to be positive and reassuring, not critical. Use phrases like “Let me show you
how to improve,” rather than saying, “You’re doing it
all wrong.” Be gentle but firm, and enlist the parents’
and patient’s help in the treatment plan and therapy.
Setting goals and complimenting achievements will assist in keeping the parents’ and patient’s attitudes positive. It is very useful to be open to parental and patient
feedback regarding their priorities and progress. As with
many long-term commitments, cyclic participation can
be expected and accepted to a certain extent. However,
the parents and patient must know the consequences
of neglect. Finally, establishment of a regular maintenance schedule is imperative. Along with prophylaxis,
reinstruction and remotivation in the plaque control
program are necessary elements for success. Recare intervals should be personalized to the individual patient’s
needs, with consideration of factors such as: caries and
periodontal disease risk; restorative, orthodontic, and
prosthetic concerns; and individual patient and parental
dental education and skill levels. It is the responsibility
of every dental practitioner to make oral hygiene and
prevention the core of his or her practice. By listening
to, educating, adapting to, and motivating our patients
and their parents, we can make our preventive practices
successful and enjoyable.

136

Chapter 7

n

Mechanical and Chemotherapeutic Home Oral Hygiene

REFERENCES
1.	McDonald RE: Pediatrics allied with pedodontics, Pediatr Herald 1(5):1, 1960.
2.	Marsh PD: Contemporary perspective on plaque control, Br
Dent J 212(12):601–606, 2012.
3.	Miller WD: Microorganisms of the human mouth, Philadelphia,
1890, SS White Dental Manufacturing.
4.	Keyes PH: The infectious and transmissible nature of experimental dental caries, Arch Oral Biol 1:304–320, 1960.
5.	Löe H, Theilade E, Jensen SB: Experimental gingivitis in man,
J Periodontol 35:177–187, 1965.
6.	Wade WG: The oral microbiome in health and disease, Pharmacolog Res 69:137–143, 2012.
7.	Aas JA, et al.: Defining the normal bacterial flora of the oral
cavity, J Clin Microbiol 43:5721–5732, 2005.
8.	Kuramitsu HK, et al.: Interspecies interactions with oral microbial communities, Microbiol Mol Biol Rev 71:653–670, 2007.
9.	Jakubovics NS, Kolenbrander PE: The road to ruin: the formation of disease-associated oral biofilms, Oral Dis 16:729–739,
2010.
10.	Kolenbrander PE, et al.: Bacterial interactions and successions during plaque development, Periodontol 2000 42:47–79,
2006.
11.	Balakrishnan M, Simmonds RS, Tagg JR: Dental caries is a
preventable infectious disease, Aust Dent J 45(4):235–245,
2000.
12.	Bradshaw DJ, Lynch RJM: Diet and the microbial aetiology
of dental caries: new paradigms, Int Dent J 63(Suppl 2):64–72,
2013.
12a.	Park KK, Matis BA, Christen AG: Choosing an effective
toothbrush, Clin Prev Dent 7(4):5–10, 1985.
13.	Updyke JR: A new handle for a child’s toothbrush, J Dent
Child 46:123–125, 1979.
14.	Voelker MA, et al.: Catalogue of tooth brush head designs,
J Dent Hyg 87(3):118–133, 2013.
15.	Sharma NC, et al.: Plaque removal efficacy and safety of the
next generation of manual toothbrush with angled bristle
technology; results from three comparative clinical studies,
Am J Dent 18:3–7, 2005.
16.	Slott DE, et al.: The efficacy of manual toothbrushes following a brushing exercise: a systematic review, Int J Dent Hyg
10:187–197, 2012.
17.	Tan E, Daly C: Comparison of new and 3-month-old toothbrushes in plaque removal, J Clin Periodontol 29:645–650, 2002.
18.	Conforti NJ, et al.: An investigation into the effect of three
months’ clinical wear on tootbrush efficacy: results from two
independent studies, J Clin Dent 14(2):29–33, 2003.
19.	Drisko CL: Periodontal self-care: evidence-based support,
Periodontol 62:243–255, 2013.
20.	Sambunjak D, et al.: Flossing for the management of periodontal diseases and dental caries in adults, Cochrane Database Syst Rev 12:CD008829, 2011.
21.	Corby PM, et al.: Treatment outcomes of dental flossing in
twins: molecular analysis of the interproximal microflora,
J Periodontol 79(8):1426–1433, 2008.
22.	Mauriello AM, et al.: Effectiveness of three interproximal
cleaning devices, Clin Prev Dent 9(3):18–22, 1987.
23.	Chen MS, Rubinson L: Preventive dental behavior in families: a national survey, J Am Dent Assoc 105:43–46, 1982.
24.	Ashkenazi M, Bidoosi M, Levin L: Factors associated with reduced compliance of children to dental preventive measures,
Odontology 100:241–248, 2012.
25.	Bass CC: An effective method of personal oral hygiene. Part
II, J La State Med Soc 106:100, 1954.
26.	Carr MP, et al.: Evaluation of floss types for interproximal
plaque removal, Am J Dent 13(4):212–214, 2000.

27.	Terezhalmy GT, Bartizek RD, Biesbrock AR: Plaque-removal efficacy of four types of dental floss, J Periodontol 79:245–251, 2008.
28.	Kerlinger FN: Foundations of behavioral research, educational
and psychological injury, New York, 1965, Holt, Rinehart and
Winston.
29.	Ho HP, Niederman R: Effectiveness of the Sonicare toothbrush on reduction of plaque, gingivitis, probing pocket
depth and subgingival bacteria in adolescent orthodontic
patients, J Clin Dent 8:15–19, 1997.
30.	Nowak AJ, et al.: A practice based study of a children’s power
toothbrush: efficiency and acceptance, Compendium 23(Suppl 2):25–32, 2002.
31.	Grossman E, Proskin H: A comparison of the efficacy and
safety of an electric and a manual children’s toothbrush,
J Am Dent Assoc 128:469–474, 1997.
32.	Jongenelis AP, Wiedemann W: A comparison of plaque removal effectiveness of an electric versus a manual toothbrush in children, J Dent Child 64:176–182, 1997.
33.	Heanue M, et al.: Manual versus powered toothbrushing for
oral health, Cochrane Database Syst Rev 1:CD002281, 2003.
34.	Robinson P, et al.: Manual versus powered toothbrushing for
oral health [review], Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2:CD002281,
2005.
35.	Deacon SA, et al.: Different powered toothbrushes for plaque
control and gingival health [review], Cochrane Database Syst
Rev 12:CD004971, 2010.
36.	American Dental Association: Council on Scientific Affairs:
Acceptance Program Guidelines—Toothbrushes, Chicago, 2012,
American Dental Association.
37.	Cochrane NJ, et al.: New approaches to enhanced remineralization of tooth enamel, J Dent Res 89(11):1187–1197, 2010.
38.	Cochrane NJ, Reynolds EC: Calcium phosphopeptides—
mechanisms of action and evidence for clinical efficacy, Adv
Dent Res 24:41–47, 2012.
39.	Adair SM, Picitelli WP, McKnight-Hanes C: Comparison of
the use of a child and an adult dentifrice by a sample of preschool children, Pediatr Dent 19:99–103, 1997.
40.	Levy SM, Zarei-M Z: Evaluation of fluoride exposures in children, J Dent Child 58:467–473, 1991.
41.	Simard PL, et al.: Ingestion of fluoride from dentifrices by
children aged 12 to 24 months, Clin Pediatr 30:614–617, 1991.
42.	Cury JA, Tenuta LMA: Evidence-based recommendation on
toothpaste use, Braz Oral Res 1:1–7, 2014.
43.	Wong MCM, et al.: Cochrane Reviews on the benefits/risks
of fluoride toothpastes, J Dent Res 90(5):573–579, 2011.
44.	Wright JT, et al.: Fluoride toothpaste efficacy and safety in
children younger than 6 years: a systematic review, J Am
Dent Assoc 145(2):182–189, 2014.
45.	Lim LP, et al.: A comparison of four techniques for clinical
detection of early plaque formed during different dietary regimes, J Clin Periodontol 13:658–665, 1986.
46.	Harris NO, Garcia-Godoy F, Nathe CN: Primary preventive
dentistry, ed 8, Pearson Education, Saddle River, NJ, 2014.
47.	Anaise JZ: The toothbrush in plaque removal, J Dent Child
42:186–189, 1975.
48.	McClure DB: A comparison of toothbrushing technics for
the preschool child, J Dent Child 33:205–210, 1966.
49.	Sangnes G, Zachrisson B, Gjermo P: Effectiveness of vertical and horizontal brushing techniques in plaque removal,
J Dent Child 39:94–97, 1972.
50.	Starkey P: Instructions to parents for brushing the child’s
teeth, J Dent Child 28:42–47, 1961.
51.	Rodrigues CR, et al.: The effect of training on the ability of
children to use dental floss, J Dent Child 63:39–41, 1996.
52.	Terhune JA: Predicting the readiness of elementary school
children to learn an effective dental flossing technique, J Am
Dent Assoc 86:1332–1336, 1973.

Chapter 7

53.	Mescher KD, Brine P, Biller I: Ability of elementary
school children to perform sulcular toothbrushing as related to their hand function ability, Pediatr Dent 2:31–36,
1980.
54.	Preisch JW: The relationship between visual motor integration
and oral hygiene in children [Master’s thesis], Bloomington,
Indiana, 1984, Indiana University.
55.	Löe H: How frequently must patients carry out effective oral
hygiene procedures in order to maintain gingival health?
J Periodontol 42:312–313, 1971.
56.	Lang NP, et al.: Toothbrushing frequency as it relates to
plaque development and gingival health, J Periodontol
44:396–405, 1973.
57.	Hodges CA, Bianco JG, Cancro LP: The removal of dental
plaque under timed intervals of toothbrushing, J Dent Res
60:425, 1981. [abstract 460].
58.	Honkala E, et al.: Effectiveness of children’s habitual toothbrushing, J Clin Periodontol 13(1):81–85, 1986.
59.	van der Ouderaa FJ: Anti-plaque agents: rationale and prospects for prevention of gingivitis and periodontal disease,
J Clin Periodontol 18:447–454, 1991.
60.	Mandel ID: Chemotherapeutic agents for controlling plaque
and gingivitis, J Clin Periodontol 15:488–498, 1988.
61.	Gunsolley JC: Clinical efficacy of antimicrobial mouthrinses,
J Dent 38:S6–S10, 2010.
62.	Stoeken JE, Paraskevas S, van der Weijden GA: The longterm effect of a mouthrinse containing essential oils on dental plaque and gingivitis: a systematic review, J Periodontol
78(7):1218–1228, 2007.
63.	Gunsolley JC: A meta-analysis of six-month studies of antiplaque and antigingivitis agents, J Am Dent Assoc 137(12):
1649–1657, 2006.
64.	Van Strydonck DAC, et al.: Effect of a chlorhexidine mouthrinse on plaque, gingival inflammation and staining in
gingivitis patients: a systematic review, J Clin Periodontol
39:1042–1055, 2012.
65.	Lang NP, et al.: Effects of supervised chlorhexidine mouthrinses in children, J Periodontal Res 17:101–111, 1982.
66.	
de la Rosa M, Sturzenberger OP, Moore DJ: The use of
chlorhexidine in the management of gingivitis in children,
J Periodontol 59(6):387–389, 1988.
67.	Twetman S: Antimicrobials in future caries control? A review
with special reference to chlorhexidine treatment, Caries Res
38:223–229, 2004.
68.	James P, Parnell C, Whelton H: The caries-preventive effect
of chlorhexidine varnish in children and adolescents: a systematic review, Caries Res 44:333–340, 2010.
69.	Burtner AP, et al.: Effects of chlorhexidine spray on plaque
and gingival health in institutionalized persons with mental
retardation, Spec Care Dentist 11(3):97–100, 1991.
70.	Chikte UM, et al.: Evaluation of stannous fluoride and
chlorhexidine sprays on plaque and gingivitis in handicapped children, J Clin Periodontol 18:281–286, 1991.

n

Mechanical and Chemotherapeutic Home Oral Hygiene

137

71.	Ferretti GA, et al.: Control of oral mucositis and candidiasis
in marrow transplantation: a prospective, double-blind trial
of chlorhexidine gluconate oral rinse, Bone Marrow Transplant 3:483–493, 1988.
72.	Raether D, et al.: Effectiveness of oral chlorhexidine for reducing stomatitis in a pediatric bone marrow transplant
population, Pediatr Dent 11:37–42, 1989.
73.	Qutob AF, et al.: Prevention of oral mucositis in children
receiving cancer therapy: a systematic review and evidencebased analysis, Oral Oncol 48:102–107, 2013.
74.	Lang NP, Brecx MC: Chlorhexidine digluconate: an agent for
chemical plaque control and prevention of gingival inflammation, J Periodontal Res 16(Suppl 21):74–89, 1986.
75.	Sharma N, et al.: Adjunctive benefit of an essential oil-containing mouthrinse in reducing plaque and gingivitis in patients
who brush and floss regularly: a six-month study, J Am Dent
Assoc 135(4):496–504, 2004.
76.	White DJ, Barker ML, Klukowska M: In vivo antiplaque efficacy of combined antimicrobial dentifrice and rinse hygiene
regimens, Am J Dent 21(3):189–196, 2008.
77.	Selbst AM, DeMaio JG, Boenning D: Mouthwash poisoning,
Clin Pediatr 24:162–163, 1985.
78.	Mrvos R, Krenzelok EP: Child-resistant closures for mouthwash. Do they make a difference? Pediatr Emerg Care 23:
713–715, 2007.
79.	Busscher HJ, et al.: Influence of a chitosan on oral bacterial adhesion and growth in vitro, Eur J Oral Sci 116(5):493–495, 2008.
80.	Park K, et al.: Comparison of plaque pH response from a
variety of sweeteners, J Dent Res 71(Spec Iss):269, 1992
[AADR abstract].
81.	Hoerman KC, et al.: Effect of gum chewing on plaque accumulation, J Clin Dent 2(1):17–21, 1990.
82.	Isokangas P, et al.: Xylitol chewing gum in caries prevention:
a field study in children, J Am Dent Assoc 117:315–320, 1988.
83.	Milgrom P, et al.: Clinical evidence for polyol efficacy, Adv
Dent Res 24(2):112–116, 2012.
84.	O’Mullane D: New agents in the chemical control of plaque
and gingivitis: reaction paper, J Dent Res 71:1455–1456, 1992.
85.	Ciancio SG: Agents for the management of plaque and gingivitis, J Dent Res 71:1450–1454, 1992.
86.	American Academy of Pediatric Dentistry: Guidelines on Infant Oral Health Care, Reference Manual. Chicago, 2014.
87.	Feil PH, et al.: Intentional use of the Hawthorne effect to
improve oral hygiene compliance in orthodontic patients,
J Dent Educ 66(10):1129–1135, 2002.
88.	Griffen AL, Goepferd SJ: Preventive oral health care for
the infant, child, and adolescent, Pediatr Clin North Am
38(5):1209–1226, 1991.
89.	Macgregor ID, Balding JW: Self-esteem as a predictor of toothbrushing behavior in young adolescents, J Clin Periodontol
18:312–316, 1991.
90.	Ong G: Practical strategies for a plaque-control program, Clin
Prev Dent 13(3):8–11, 1991.

CHAPTER

8

Nutritional Considerations
for the Pediatric Dental Patient
s Laura M. Romito and James L. McDonald Jr.

For additional resources, please visit the

website.

CHAPTER OUTLINE
MYPLATE FOOD GUIDANCE SYSTEM
DIETARY INTAKE PATTERNS
Eating Out
Portion Sizes
Meal Pattern and Frequency
MALNUTRITION AND FOOD
INSECURITY
PEDIATRIC UNDERNUTRITION

T

Iron
Zinc
Calcium
Vitamin D
Vitamin B12
PEDIATRIC OVERNUTRITION
Health Impact of High Salt Intake
FEEDING AND EATING DISORDERS

his chapter focuses on healthful dietary and nutritional practices for dental patients presented within the framework of a Pediatric Dentistry textbook.
It is obvious that eating nutritiously promotes not only
healthy teeth and gums but also a healthy body. Contemporary research continues to demonstrate that pursuing nutritious eating behaviors is essential in maximizing
health, vitality, and longevity.
Heart disease and cancer top the list of the leading
causes of death in the United States, with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and stroke filling the 3rd and
4th spots, respectively.1 However, three major lifestyle
choices are the underlying causes of these diseases: using
tobacco products, leading a sedentary lifestyle, and making poor dietary choices. Clearly, both what we eat and
what we do not eat are major factors affecting the length
and quality of our lives. The basis of our dietary choices
is established early in life, and these food choices and
dietary patterns will affect our health and well-being at
every stage of life. There are many ways in which health
professionals can promote the health of their patients.
One means is to educate them and their caregivers regarding proper eating behaviors.
Research studies show that individuals who live in
countries bordering the Mediterranean Sea live long­
er and are less prone to a variety of diseases than are
those residing in other countries. This is often attributed
to the consumption of a diet rich in fruits, vegetables,
nuts, whole grains, legumes, and olive oil and low in
red meat, sugar, and saturated fat. Eating in this manner provides many health benefits, especially when these
dietary patterns are combined with regular physical activity. Although a cause-effect relationship has not been
conclusively demonstrated, an association does exist

138

Anorexia Nervosa
Bulimia
Binge-Eating Disorder
Q & A CONCERNING PEDIATRIC
NUTRITION ISSUES

between consumption of the Mediterranean diet and
good health outcomes.2 Eating a Mediterranean diet results in better control of body weight and blood pressure
and assists in the more effective regulation of blood sugar
and cholesterol levels. The Mediterranean dietary pattern
also provides protection against cardiovascular diseases,
Parkinson’s disease, Alzheimer’s, type 2 diabetes, and certain types of cancer. It is enlightening to compare life expectancy data between the United States and several of
the countries located in the vicinity of the Mediterranean
Sea (Table 8-1) to determine how those who regularly
consume such a diet compare with those who do not.3
Although several factors may contribute to these differences in life expectancy, the United States ranks behind
four Mediterranean countries in this regard. On average,
American men live 3.3 fewer years than do their Italian
counterparts, with American women some 3.6 years behind Italian women. Although not conclusive, analysis of
the data (see Table 12-1) supports the potential value of

Table 8-1
Life Expectancy Comparison
COUNTRY
Italy
France
Spain
Greece
United States

MEAN LIFE EXPECTANCY (IN
YEARS) AT BIRTH BY GENDER
Men

Women

79.2
78.2
78.2
77.4
75.9

84.5
84.8
84.4
82.7
80.9

Chapter 8

n

Nutritional Considerations for the Pediatric Dental Patient

139

Table 8-2
Healthy People 2020 selected nutritional goals
Objective

Baseline

Target

NWS-1 Increase the number of States with nutrition standards for foods and beverages
provided to preschool-aged children in child care
NWS-2.1 Increase the proportion of schools that do not sell or offer calorically s­ weetened
beverages to students
NWS-2.2 Increase the proportion of school districts that require schools to make fruits or
vegetables available whenever other food is offered or sold
NWS-3 Increase the number of States that have State-level policies that provide i­ncentives
to food retail outlets to provide foods that are encouraged by the Dietary Guidelines for
Americans
NWS-10.4 Reduce the proportion of children and adolescents aged 2 to 19 years who are
considered obese
NWS-12 Eliminate very low food security among children (% of households)
NWS-14 Increase the contribution of fruits to the diets of the population aged 2 years and
older; *cup equivalent per 1000 calories
NWS-15.1 Increase the contribution of total vegetables to the diets of the population aged
2 years and older; *cup equivalent per 1000 calories
NWS-20 Increase consumption of calcium in the population aged 2 years and older

24

34

9.3%

21.3%

6.6%

18.6%

8

18

16.1%

14.5%

1.3%
0.5*

0.2%
0.9*

0.8*

1.1*

1119 mg

1300 mg

the Mediterranean style of eating as an important factor
in promoting health and longevity.
In the United States, the Healthy People 2020 document provides evidence-based goals and 10-year benchmarks to guide national health promotion and disease
prevention efforts to improve the health of all Americans
in the upcoming decade. Released in 2010 by the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services,4 it builds on the
accomplishments of three decades of previous Healthy
People initiatives. Objectives under the topic of Nutrition
and Weight Status support consumption of a healthful diet
and maintenance of a healthy body weight, and recognize
that factors that are critical to the adoption of healthy lifestyles include individual suggestions as well as the policies
and environments that support such ­behaviors. Table 8-2
summarizes key objectives related to pediatric nutrition.
The 2010 Dietary Guidelines for Americans promulgated by the U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) support the objectives in the Healthy People documents and
emphasize
the following major goals for Americans:
  
•	Balance calories with physical activity to manage weight
•	Consume more of certain foods and nutrients such
as fruits, vegetables, whole grains, fat-free and low-fat
dairy products, and seafood
•	Consume fewer foods with sodium (salt), saturated fats,
transfats, cholesterol, added sugars, and refined grains
  
The 2015 Dietary Guidelines for Americans are currently being developed. More information on these
guidelines5 can be found at the following website: http://
www.health.gov/dietaryguidelines/2010.asp.

MYPLATE FOOD GUIDANCE SYSTEM
The MyPlate Food Guidance System is a pictorial representation of the USDA’s daily food recommendations. Released in 2012, MyPlate replaced the nation’s previously

well-known nutrition education tool, MyPyramid (2005).
In MyPlate, the five food groups are visually represented
by a place setting in which each of the food groups (fruits,
vegetables, proteins, dairy, and grains) is depicted proportionally according to the current recommendations. In
addition, the website ChooseMyPlate.gov offers numerous educational resources and practical guidance for consumers, educators, and health professionals in building a
healthful diet. For example, one can develop an individualized nutrition plan based on personal factors such as
age, gender, and physical activity by utilizing the online
tools, such as SuperTracker, and the Daily Food Plan and
Worksheets6 (http://choosemyplate.gov). The site offers
several food plans for special populations, such as vegetarians, moms, and preschoolers. The SuperTracker tool
can help plan, analyze, and track one’s diet, weight, and
physical activity; it can also be further personalized by
using the goal setting, virtual coaching, and journaling
features. Health and nutrition information for children
over the age of 5 years is also provided on the site and includes activities, coloring pages, and interactive games as
well as tips for caregivers concerning children’s nutrition
and meal planning (Fig. 8-1).

DIETARY INTAKE PATTERNS
Trends in U.S. dietary intake patterns reflect changes in
several factors, including the consumption of low-nutrient,
high-calorie foods and beverages (empty calories), as well
as changes in the average portion size, snacking habits,
and eating away from home.7 National surveys measuring nutritional status and dietary patterns of children and
adolescents revealed that the total caloric intake of U.S.
children increased from the 1970s to the 1990s; these
results reflect an increased consumption of soft drinks,
grain products, fried potatoes, noncitrus juices, cheese,

140

Chapter 8

n

Nutritional Considerations for the Pediatric Dental Patient

Figure 8-1 Choose My Plate. (Courtesy of USDA’s Center for

Nutrition and Policy Promotion.)

candy, and fruit drinks.8,9 Conversely, over this time period, decreases were found in intakes of milk in general,
whole milk, vegetables and legumes, beef, pork, and eggs.
Less than half of children consumed the recommended
number of servings of any given food group, and their
intakes of discretionary fat and added sugar were much
higher than recommended.
Using data from the National Health and Nutrition
Examination Survey (NHANES), researchers have continued to monitor dietary trends among American children
and adolescents. For example, in evaluating beverage
consumption for children from birth to 5 years of age,
Fulgoni found that although milk remains the primary beverage, intakes have declined. From the 1970s
through the 1990s, approximately 85% of preschoolers consumed some form of milk, but by 2000-2006,
milk consumption had declined to 77%.10 Conversely,
fruit juice consumption increased dramatically over the
same time period. While fruit juice can be an important
source of vitamin C, potassium, and magnesium, it may
also replace other nutritious foods, including those with
calcium. From 1976 to 2006, preschoolers’ consumption of fruit drinks, which contain less than 10% fruit
juice but generous amounts of added sugars, remained
relatively stable at approximately 35-37% of this population.10 At least one third of preschoolers regularly
consumed soft drinks, and the consumed amounts increased with child age. Han and Powell11 reported that
in the United States, regular soda was the major form
of sugar-sweetened beverage consumed by young people, particularly teenagers, and those from low socioeconomic backgrounds. However, while consumption
of soda has decreased in recent years, the prevalence
of sports/energy drink consumption has tripled. This
is concerning because, along with the well-known risk
for dental caries, there is evidence that high intakes
of sweetened beverages are associated with increased

caloric intake, weight gain, and obesity.12,13 Furthermore, an increased intake of sugar-sweetened beverages
among children aged 3-11 years has been associated
with a decrease in HDL cholesterol levels and increases
in waist circumference and C-reactive protein, a known
marker of inflammation and cardiometabolic disease.14
From 1989 to 2004, there was an appreciable rise in
daily calories consumed among U.S. children and teenagers.15 One study found that in individuals aged 2-18
years, empty calories accounted for nearly 40% of daily
energy intake.16 The increase in calories during this period was attributed to an increased intake of the following foods: sugar-sweetened beverages, pizza, full-fat milk,
grain-based desserts, breads, pasta, and savory snacks.
However, from 2003 to 2010, along with an increase in
fruit consumption, total caloric intake in U.S. children
declined, as did their consumption of many of the aforementioned foods. However, this trend did not occur
among preschool-aged children and those of low socioeconomic status; compared with 1989-1991, their total
energy intakes remained significantly higher in 20092010.15 In preschoolers, from 1989 to 2008, there was an
increase in foods with high levels of added sugar and fat
such as savory snacks, pizza, calzones, Mexican dishes,
sweet snacks/candy, and fruit juice.17
Although current trends may indicate a shift toward
improved dietary intake, consumption of excess calories
and foods with added fat and sugar negatively affects
the overall quality of children’s diets. In the National
Growth and Health Study, Moore et al. found that the
aforementioned excesses contributed to inadequate intakes of essential vitamins and minerals, as well as to
intakes of dairy foods, fruits, and vegetables that fell
short of recommended levels in more than 90% of teenage girls.18 Similarly, Ionotti et al. determined, from a
survey of a nationally representative sample of 6th to
10th graders, that only 25% of the children consumed
the highest proportions of daily vegetables and fruits
and the smallest intake of energy-dense, low-nutrient
foods.19
In 2013 over 13 million children participated in the
School Breakfast Program (SBP) and over 30 million participated in the National School Lunch Program (NSLP).
These federally funded programs evolved as efforts to assist children in low-income households. Children from
households with incomes at or below the poverty level
are eligible for free meals; those with higher incomes may
be eligible for reduced-price meals.20 Because school meal
programs can have a significant impact on children’s
health, their ability to meet nutritional quality standards
is important. An analysis of a nationally representative
sample of children in the NSLP from grades 1 to 12 found
that, compared with meals eaten at home, school lunches
provided lower-calorie, higher-quality food; in addition,
NSLP participants ate fewer calories from sugar-sweetened
beverages at school than did nonparticipants, but obtained
more calories from low-nutrient, energy-dense solid foods
such as fries and higher-fat baked goods in secondary
schools. Overall, compared with nonparticipants, school
lunch participants’ dietary intake at school was lower in
calories.21

Chapter 8

However, Clark and Fox reported that while the majority of U.S. public schoolchildren obtained nutritionally
adequate diets from school meals, 80% consumed excess
saturated fat and 92% consumed excess sodium.22 High
sodium intakes may increase dietary intake of sugary beverages.23 A survey of school principals from a nationally
representative sample of elementary schools found that
participation in the federal school nutrition program,
Fresh Fruits and Vegetable Program, increased the availability of fresh fruits during school lunch meals.24 Likewise, a systematic review and meta-analysis by Evans et al.
found that from 1989 to 2009, school-based nutrition
programs generated a modest improvement on children’s
fruit consumption but had no impact on vegetable intake.25 Clearly, there is room for improvement.

EATING OUT
Children and teenagers continue to obtain more of their
meals outside of the home, often from fast-food establishments. From the late 1970s through the mid-2000s, the
percentage of daily calories consumed in fast-food restaurants by children aged 2-18 years grew from 2% to 13%,
while full-service restaurants’ contribution to their daily
caloric intake increased from 1% to 5%.26,27 From 2000
to 2008, fast-food and full-service restaurant meal consumption by children and teenagers was associated with
increased calories, particularly for adolescents and those
in low socioeconomic groups, as well as higher intakes
of soda and sugar-sweetened drinks. Fast-food intake increased total fat, saturated fat, sugar for both groups, and
sodium and protein for teenagers.28 However, the type of
restaurant may be a moderating factor. Larson et al. found
that compared with “burger and fries” establishments,
those serving primarily sandwiches/subs were associated
with fewer markers of poor diet quality and had no relationship with body weight.29 Likewise, recent systematic
reviews examining the association among eating out, die­
tary intake, and weight concluded that eating away from
home is a risk factor for higher fat and calorie intakes
and lower consumption of micronutrients30 but remain
less conclusive about weight gain, especially in young
populations.31

PORTION SIZES
Along with an increase in eating outside the home, there
is a trend toward expanded food-serving sizes. Most marketplace portions of foods exceed standard serving sizes
by at least a factor of 2 (e.g., bagels and sodas) and sometimes by a factor of 8 (e.g., cookies).32 Fast-food chains
offer larger sizes of hamburgers, sodas, and fries. The current serving sizes are often two to five times larger than
the size originally marketed. These changes in dietary patterns parallel the progressive increase in obesity seen in
the United States. Based on this information, eating away
from home is associated with a compromised quality of
nutritional intake and may increase the risk for chronic
diseases. An analysis of the dietary patterns of U.S. children
and adolescents from 2003 to 2006 found that, compared
with younger children, teenagers are more susceptible to
distorted portion sizes and that high-calorie, low-nutrient
foods such as sugar-sweetened beverages, fries, and pizza

n

Nutritional Considerations for the Pediatric Dental Patient

141

were popular with youth of all age groups and accounted
for a significant portion of their diet.33

MEAL PATTERN AND FREQUENCY
Although from 2000 to 2011 U.S. kids and teenagers had
increased intakes of high-calorie, low-nutrient snacks, an
association between snacking behavior and obesity remains unclear.34 However, Koletzko et al. found that a
higher meal frequency among children was associated
with a decreased risk of obesity, which led the authors to
suggest that children should consume 5 nutritious meals
per day.35
Eating dinner at home in a dining area and helping
to prepare meals were associated with a decreased body
mass index (BMI) in children.36 Furthermore, in teenagers,
Berge et al. found that positive interpersonal communications with family members at the dinner table was asso­
ciated with lower BMI and greater vegetable consumption.37
However, from 1999 to 2010, a widening gap in family
meals based on socioeconomic status was noted by a Minnesota study. Youth in the lowest socioeconomic status
showed a decrease from 4 to 3.6 family meals per week
over the time period, while those in upper socioeconomic
groups had an increase in family meals.38 This trend does
not bode well for low-income youth, who have greater
risk of poor health outcomes.

MALNUTRITION AND FOOD INSECURITY
Malnutrition includes undernutrition (inadequate intake
of nutrients that potentially leads to deficiency diseases)
and overnutrition (excessive dietary intake of energy, fat,
or cholesterol that predisposes individuals to chronic diseases). While the latter excessive consumption pattern
may be quantitatively more relevant to overall mortality
and morbidity rates in contemporary U.S. society than
are nutrient deficiencies, malnutrition from dietary insufficiency has not been eradicated.
Chronic malnutrition as measured by low weight for
age and low growth rates has decreased; some of this decline has been attributed to better nutrition. Today, the
proportion of mothers receiving early prenatal care is at
a record high. Data released in 2012 by the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services reported that as of
2011, the overall rate at which infants die before their
first birthday was 6.05 deaths per 1000 live births. However, infant death rates are disproportionately higher in
specific racial/ethnic groups, such as African Americans
and Native Americans, with 13.3 and 9.2 deaths per 1000
live births, respectively. Furthermore, the U.S. infant mortality rate continues to rank among the highest of the industrialized nations. More than 16 million children in the
United States live in poverty, and some estimates indicate
that children in approximately 10% of households experience hunger or the risk of hunger.39
Knol and colleagues evaluated the dietary patterns of
low-income children from 2 to 3 years of age and from 4
to 8 years of age and found that the predominant eating
patterns in both groups were not indicative of a balanced
diet as described by national recommendations. Rather,
the diets mimicked those of adults, with high intakes of

142

Chapter 8

n

Nutritional Considerations for the Pediatric Dental Patient

added sugars and discretionary fats as a percentage of daily calories.40 Thus children of low socioeconomic status
are at risk for the long-term consequences of malnutrition.
According to USDA, food security is generally defined
as “access by all people at all times to enough food for
an active, healthy life.” Conversely, food insecurity describes a “household-level economic and social condition
of limited or uncertain access to adequate food.” Hunger
is an individual-level physiological condition that may
result from food insecurity, and refers to “a potential consequence of food insecurity that, because of prolonged,
involuntary lack of food, results in discomfort, illness,
weakness, or pain that goes beyond the usual uneasy sensation.”41,42 Thus food insecurity is considered a risk factor for malnutrition.
Data regarding the food security of U.S. households
are obtained by USDA from federally sponsored national
surveys. The food security status of each household is categorized according to the following labels.
•	High food security: Households had no problems or
anxiety about consistently accessing adequate food.
•	Marginal food security: Households had problems at
times, or anxiety about, accessing adequate food, but
the quality, variety, and quantity of their food intake
were not substantially reduced.
•	Low food security: Households reduced the quality, variety, and desirability of their diets, but the quantity
of food intake and normal eating patterns were not
substantially disrupted.
•	Very low food security: At times during the year, eating
patterns of one or more household members were
disrupted and food intake reduced because the household lacked money and other resources for food.
USDA reported that in 2012, 85.5% of U.S. households
were food secure; however, 14.5% of households (17 million individuals) reported being food insecure, with 5.7%
reporting very low food security. Prevalence of food insecurity was greater in metropolitan areas, poor households, households with children headed by single women
or single men, and African-American and Hispanic households.
Because food-insecure households are eligible to receive assistance from federally funded programs such as
the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (formerly
the Food Stamp Program), research has been ongoing to
understand the impact of these programs on food insecurity and nutrition. In addition, studies are seeking to
clarify the relationships between food insecurity and nutritional status, health risks, and reduced quality of life,
especially in children. Ryu and Bartfield analyzed household food security data from a nationally representative
sample of U.S. children followed from kindergarten in
1998 through eighth grade in 2007. More than one fifth
of the children resided in a food-insecure home during the
9-year timeframe, which, in many cases, was a transient
situation. Nevertheless, results suggested poorer health
status for children living with persistent household food
insecurity.43 Food insecurity has also been associated with
increased mental and substance abuse disorders in adolescents.44

A recent literature review found that there is a growing
body of evidence supporting the association between food
insecurity and obesity in teenagers, but the relationship
remains unclear in children.45 For example, a longitudinal study of the relationship of food insecurity on obesity, conducted with a sample of nearly 30,000 non-white,
low-income children participating in the Massachusetts
Special Supplemental Nutrition Program for Women,
Infants, and Children, found that, compared with children in food-secure homes, those experiencing persistent
household food insecurity had 22% greater odds of being
obese.46 However, this finding was moderated by maternal prepregnancy weight status, with obesity more common among children of underweight and obese women.
Clearly, more research is needed in this area to improve
understanding of these relationships.

PEDIATRIC UNDERNUTRITION
Undernutrition is the insufficient consumption of essential nutrients, resulting in health problems. Failure to
thrive is a concern sometimes observed among infants
and children. This term refers to individuals whose current body weight or rate of weight gain falls significantly
below that of other children of similar age and gender.
These children are much smaller and shorter than their
counterparts, and may lack mental and social skills as well
as physical abilities such as rolling over, sitting, standing,
and walking. Although there are numerous potential environmental and medical causes of failure to thrive, poor
eating habits, such as not having formal mealtimes or
chronically eating in front of the television, may play a
role.
Typically, in mild but chronic undernutrition, weight
loss with normal height and head circumference is seen.
If the situation continues, growth will slow, and head
circumference and height will be below age- and genderrelated standards. Severe lack of caloric intake results in a
wasting condition known as marasmus. Adequate intake
of calories with insufficient protein can produce kwashiorkor, a condition characterized by increased susceptibility to infections and edema. However, these latter two
conditions are primarily seen in areas plagued with famine and are rarely seen in the United States.
The Third School Nutrition Dietary Assessment Study47
assessed the quality and contributions of the National
School Lunch Program and the School Breakfast Program
to children’s nutritional health. Both are longstanding
government programs designed to bring nutritious food
to America’s children. The results indicate that the majority of U.S. schoolchildren consume nutritionally adequate diets, though many may have deficient fiber intake,
with excessive consumption of saturated fat and sodium.
Nevertheless, 15% of children still showed inadequate
intakes of vitamin A, vitamin C, vitamin E, phosphorus,
and magnesium. These inadequacies were greatest among
female adolescents. Elementary schoolchildren showed
excessive intakes of calories, but this was not observed
among high school students. Since these three vitamins
and two minerals seem to be an issue among some children, a short consideration of each follows.

Chapter 8

Vitamin A has two fundamental forms in foods: retinoids found in animal foods and carotenoids present in
plant foods. Since both plant and animal food are good
sources, true dietary deficiencies are generally not likely
to be a problem in Westernized societies. In contrast, vitamin C, which is required for wound healing and healthy
blood vessels, is found only in fruits and vegetables, and
if these foods are not regularly eaten, suboptimal deficiencies of this vitamin can occur. Vitamin E represents
a collection of chemically similar vitamins that provide
important resistance to oxidative stress in the body. Richest
dietary sources are nuts, seeds, fruits, fish, and plant oils.
Supplements of this vitamin are quite popular, but food
sources are likely a safer and more effective choice.
Phosphorus is an essential mineral nutrient required
for strong bones and teeth. It is found in practically every food item in the human diet. As a result, a dietary
deficiency is extremely unlikely. Magnesium is another
mineral with important roles in human metabolism and
is widespread in animal and plant foods alike. Richest
sources are green leafy vegetables, nuts and seeds, fish,
legumes, and whole grains.
Nutrient undernutrition may have several causes,
only one of which is an inadequate dietary intake. Some
cases may be secondary to poor socioeconomic status,
lack of education, perceived allergies/food intolerances,
and child neglect or abuse. Historically, iron, calcium,
and zinc are three minerals sometimes ingested only at
marginal levels by many youth. Vitamins D and B12 have
also been found difficult to ingest at recommended levels
among children and adolescents in research studies.48,49

IRON
Iron fulfills its primary role in the body as a component of
blood hemoglobin and muscle myoglobin, by providing
cells with a constant supply of oxygen. It also functions
as a co-factor for many enzymatic reactions in the body
and is important for proper functioning of the immune
system. Although the prevalence of iron deficiency has
declined in recent years, it remains an enormous problem
globally and an important pediatric public health problem even in the United States. Many of the adverse consequences of iron deficiency are associated with its most
severe form, iron-deficiency anemia. However, iron deficiency without anemia is associated with poor cognition
and lower scholastic achievement in children and adolescents.50 Clinical signs of iron-deficiency anemia may
include weakness, fatigue, pallor, and numbness and tingling of the extremities. Common oral manifestations are
glossitis and fissures at the corners of the mouth (angular
cheilitis). The papillae of the tongue may be atrophied,
which gives the tongue a smooth, shiny, red appearance.
In addition, pallor of the oral mucosa or lips may be observed. Affected individuals may also be at increased risk
for fungal infections, such as candidiasis.
Iron needs are higher during growth stages, and those
most vulnerable to iron deficiency include preterm and
low-birthweight infants, older infants and toddlers, teenage girls, and women of child-bearing age. Iron deficiency
early in life appears related to behavioral problems in
infants who score significantly lower on various tests

n

Nutritional Considerations for the Pediatric Dental Patient

143

measuring intellectual and motor functioning. An assessment of iron deficiency prevalence in U.S. children from 1
to 3 years of age during 1976-2002 showed no significant
changes during this period, with overall prevalence ranging from 8% to 10%. Iron deficiency prevalence decreased
from 22% to 9% in toddlers in low-income households,
but remained at 7% in toddlers from households above
the poverty level. During this 26-year period, iron deficiency prevalence in African-American toddlers decreased
from 16% to 6%, but remained unchanged in both Hispanic and white children at 13% and 6%, respectively.
Prolonged bottle feeding for up to 48 months of age was
positively correlated with increased prevalence of iron deficiency and may account for the higher prevalence seen
in Hispanic toddlers.
Somewhat surprisingly, overweight toddlers have a significantly higher prevalence of iron deficiency than do
comparable normal-weight or underweight peers. This
has also been observed in older children and adolescents.
Possible explanations for this association include a greater
intake of foods high in calories, but low in iron, an alteration in iron absorption or metabolism, and a reduced
level of physical activity among the overweight children.
Additionally, overweight girls may grow faster and mature earlier than normal-weight peers, making it more
difficult to meet their iron requirements. To prevent iron
deficiency, vulnerable populations should be encouraged
to eat iron-rich foods and breast-feed or use iron-fortified
formula for infants. Iron is found primarily in meat, poultry, and fish. However, other foods such as beans, lentils,
fortified cereal grain products, and certain vegetables can
also contribute to dietary intake of iron.

ZINC
The trace mineral zinc has important roles in growth and
development, sexual maturation, immune function, and
wound healing; it also has a role in taste and smell acuity.
Recently, it has become a popular medicament for treating the common cold (Box 8-1).
Severe zinc deficiency in children is common in developing countries, but far less so in the United States.
Chronic low dietary zinc intakes may produce a deficiency, as may low bioavailability, and/or adverse interactions
with other nutrients. Iron and zinc share many common
food sources, so individuals at risk for iron deficiency may
also be at risk for zinc deficiency. Zinc is present in foods
that are high in protein, such as beef, eggs, poultry, and
legumes, as well as in whole grains, fortified, ready-to-eat
cereals, and dark green and yellow vegetables. However,
as is the case with iron, zinc from plant food sources is

Box 8-1
Zinc Study51,52
Two studies conducted with a study population of schoolchildren have suggested that taking zinc-containing lozenges can ease the symptoms of the common cold and
shorten its duration.
Dosages tested were 10-15 mg zinc sulfate daily.

144

Chapter 8

n

Nutritional Considerations for the Pediatric Dental Patient

not as well absorbed as that found in animal foods. Briefel
and colleagues53 assessed zinc intakes from food and supplements in the U.S. population between 1988 and 1994
using NHANES III data. Results indicated that in children
younger than 10 years, boys and girls had similar zinc intakes, but in those older than 10, boys’ intakes exceeded
those of girls. Eighty-one percent of 1- to 3-year-olds and
48 percent of 4- to 6-year-olds had inadequate zinc intake,
defined as less than 77% of the 1989 Recommended Dietary Allowance. In addition, roughly 61% of adolescent
girls had inadequate intake compared with 38% of adolescent boys.53
One of the first clinical manifestations of severe zinc
deficiency in children is stunted growth. Other signs
and symptoms include abnormal immune responses,
decreased reproductive development and function, and
skeletal abnormalities. Oral manifestations include impaired wound healing, alterations of the oral epithelium,
xerostomia, reduced or altered sense of taste or smell, and
reduced appetite. During tooth formation, children with
zinc deficiency may be at increased risk for dental caries.
In addition, because of its impact on immune function,
zinc deficiency may increase the risk of oral infections
such as periodontal disease and candidiasis.

CALCIUM
Calcium and vitamin D work together to maximize the
mineralization of bones and teeth. Calcium is also needed
for proper nerve and muscle activity, blood clotting, and
transport of ions across cell membranes. Individuals at risk
for inadequate calcium intake include those who dislike
milk and other food sources of calcium, as well as those
with milk allergies, lactose intolerance, and malabsorptive
disorders. Inadequate calcium intake over time can increase the risk of bone demineralization and osteoporosis.
Osteoporosis is a bone disease of older individuals and
is most commonly diagnosed in postmenopausal women.
It is characterized by a reduction in the quantity of skeletal tissue and thus is often considered to be a geriatric
disorder. Education for its prevention, however, is legitimately within the domain of pediatricians and pediatric
dentists. Childhood and adolescence are crucial times
for development of the skeletal system, and the dietary
requirement for calcium peaks during the teenage years.
The Food and Nutrition Board of the Institute of Medicine recommends an intake of 1300 mg per day of calcium during adolescence. This equals roughly the amount
of calcium present in 4 1⁄3 cups of milk, so this is not an
easy recommendation to meet.
Achieving a high peak bone mass is the first line of
defense against osteoporosis. Low calcium intake, particularly in combination with low levels of physical activity,
may compromise the attainment of optimal peak bone
mass. This is a particularly important consideration for
adolescent girls, because almost half of the adult skeletal
mass is formed during the second decade of life, and calcium accumulation normally triples during the pubertal
growth spurt. Unfortunately, this is the very age group
that is at highest risk for low calcium intakes. Only 30%
of adolescent girls reach 75% of the recommended daily
allowance for calcium, and its intake appears to be

declining among 6- to 11-year-olds. This problem may be
alleviated by educating youth to select more calcium-rich
foods (e.g., cheese, yogurt, fortified breakfast cereals, fortified orange juice concentrates) or to consider using calcium
supplements. Calcium carbonate has a good absorption
rate and has been characterized as a relatively inexpensive supplement containing a high percentage level of
calcium. The concept that dental alveolar bone height
loss is associated with osteoporosis is supported by research; therefore strategies for reducing osteoporosis risk
may also help retard alveolar bone loss. Dental professionals can help improve both the oral and systemic health
of their pediatric patients over the long term by guiding
them in meeting calcium intake recommendations.54

VITAMIN D
Vitamin D is a fat-soluble vitamin that promotes the absorption of calcium from foods in the gastrointestinal
tract, leading to proper mineralization of bones and teeth.
As a result, having adequate stores of this vitamin is crucial for proper skeletal and dental development. Vitamin
D also acts in concert with parathyroid hormone to maintain tight control of blood calcium levels. A slight reduction in blood calcium concentration stimulates secretion
of parathyroid hormone, which mobilizes calcium and
phosphorus from the skeleton to reestablish calcium homeostasis in the blood. Vitamin D seems to play a role in
immune function; in addition, lack of this vitamin may
contribute to several diseases, including hypertension,
multiple sclerosis, and certain cancers. It has recently
been suggested to be a factor in serotonin synthesis in the
brain and to perhaps play a role in autism.55
Vitamin D deficiency is increasingly being recognized
as pandemic. The problem is threefold:
1.	There is a lack of appreciation that exposure to sunlight is a significant source of the vitamin.
2.	Few foods naturally contain vitamin D.
3.	Foods that are fortified with vitamin D are often
not consumed in sufficient amounts to meet the
requirement.
Weng and colleagues discovered that, in a large sample
of 6- to 21-year-olds in the northeastern United States,
more than half the individuals were found to have low
serum vitamin D concentrations; the prevalence of deficiencies increased with advancing age, and also during
the winter months, especially in African-American children.56 In a different study of nearly 400 healthy infants
and toddlers, 12% of the children had suboptimal serum
levels of vitamin D, and a third of these children exhibited radiographic evidence of bone demineralization. Predictors of vitamin D deficiency included breast-feeding
without supplementation in the infants and low milk
intake among the toddlers. Cushman and colleagues57
evaluated the effects of subclinical vitamin D deficiency
on bone mineral density (BMD) and bone turnover in
healthy adolescent boys and girls. Even though no relation between BMD and vitamin D status was observed in
boys, the 12- to 15-year-old girls with high vitamin D status had significantly greater bone density, lower serum
parathyroid hormone, and lower bone turnover markers
than girls with low vitamin D status.

Chapter 8

Exposure to sunlight is the major source of vitamin D
for most people. Ultraviolet rays from the sun trigger vitamin D synthesis in the skin from its chemical precursor,
7-dehydrocholesterol. Natural sources of this vitamin are
fatty fish such as salmon, mackerel, and herring, as well
as fish oil, including cod liver oil. In the United States,
although some juices, breads, yogurts, and cheeses are enriched with vitamin D, fortified milk is considered as the
primary dietary source of the vitamin.
Because vitamin D is an essential nutrient for proper skeletal development, children who receive too little may develop
rickets—a bone disease characterized by bone deformities,
poor muscle development, abnormal spinal curvature, and
bowed legs. The latter manifestation occurs because the
skeleton cannot support the body weight of the child. In
addition, enlarged joints and delayed closure of the skull
bones may be present. The presence of rickets during tooth
development may result in enamel and dentin hypoplasia,
incomplete development, or delayed tooth eruption.
During the first half of the twentieth century, thousands
of cases of nutritional rickets were reported in the United
States, particularly in the northern climates during the winter months, when exposure to sunlight was minimal. This
disease was virtually eradicated once vitamin D began to
be added to milk. In recent years, however, a resurgence
of rickets has occurred, particularly in African-American
breast-fed babies. There appear to be two major reasons for
this resurgence. First is the increase in breast-feeding. Breastfeeding is the preferred method of infant nutrition, but by
itself does not supply adequate amounts of vitamin D. Second, endogenously produced vitamin D via effective sun
exposure has decreased; it can vary with time of exposure,
amount of skin exposed, degree of air pollution and cloud
cover, the time of day, latitude, season, sunscreen use, and
skin pigmentation. Time spent indoors watching television
or playing electronic games does not provide sun exposure.
Compared with individuals possessing a lighter complexion, those with heavily pigmented skin are less efficient
in synthesizing vitamin D from sunlight. In addition,
some African Americans are unable to digest the lactose
in milk efficiently, which leads to a significant reduction
in milk intake and consequently in vitamin D levels. The
increase in reported cases of nutritional rickets prompted
the American Academy of Pediatrics to issue new guidelines in 2003 recommending supplemental vitamin D
for all breast-fed infants. However, this recommendation
has not been universally adopted by pediatricians, which
leaves concerns about the continued risks of vitamin D–
dependent rickets in U.S. children.58

VITAMIN B12
Vitamin B12 is one of the B-complex vitamins, and cobalt is present within the molecule, classifying it as the
only vitamin containing a mineral element. Vitamin B12
is essential in producing red blood cells in the bone marrow and for myelin synthesis in the nervous system. B12
is thought to be present only in animal foods (meat, fish,
eggs, and dairy products), and as a result, strict vegetarians are considered to be at risk for a dietary deficiency.
Those suffering from anorexia nervosa and bulimia are
also considered to be vulnerable to a deficiency.

n

Nutritional Considerations for the Pediatric Dental Patient

145

Neurologic impairment resulting from a vitamin B12
deficiency has been reported in two children breast-fed
by vegetarian mothers. In one of these cases, the diagnosis was made at 15 months, and vitamin B12 therapy was
initiated. At age 28 months, the child’s developmental
skill levels ranged from 9 months for fine motor skills
to 18 months for gross motor skills. Her expressive language was at a 10-month level.59 Health care providers
should be alert to the possibility of B12 deficiency under these circumstances. Plant foods fortified with this
vitamin, such as selected cereals, meat analogues, soy or
rice beverages, and nutritional yeast, can be reliable and
regular sources.
Chronic vitamin B12 deficiency can result from a lack of
the vitamin in the diet, and it can also be due to an autoimmune reaction in which intrinsic factor, a stomach protein
required for the absorption of B12, is not produced. The lack
of intrinsic factor can result in a vitamin B12 anemia known
as pernicious anemia, which is characterized by large, immature blood cells. Additional signs and symptoms of deficiency of this vitamin include pallor, dizziness, fatigue,
weight loss, confusion, hypotension, and peripheral nerve
degeneration. Oral manifestations of vitamin B12 deficiency
include soreness of the soft tissues and atrophic glossitis.60

PEDIATRIC OVERNUTRITION
For the majority of children and adolescents in the
United States today, negative health outcomes brought
on by malnutrition are far more likely to be related to
overconsumption of food, sodium, and calories than to
deficiencies brought on by underconsumption of food and
nutrients. In other words, the risk of a child suffering
from type 2 diabetes related to obesity is considerably
greater than that of getting scurvy brought on by insufficient vitamin C intake.
Perhaps the greatest current public health threat for our
country is the increasing prevalence of overweight and obesity, which have ballooned during the last 3 decades of the
twentieth century. This issue invariably leads to a lifelong
struggle with body weight control issues, and the attendant
increased risk for heart disease, cancer, and stroke. Until recently, this epidemic appeared to be continuing unabated.61
Simply stated, obesity results from a chronic imbalance between energy intake and energy expenditure, in
which the former exceeds the latter. However, its increasing incidence is related to a complex array of genetic,
environmental, psychosocial, biological, and economic
factors. Obesity is traditionally defined as the excessive
accumulation of fat in the body, whereas overweight
means weighing more than is considered normal. These
terms are often defined based on BMI. BMI is calculated
by dividing the individual’s weight in kilograms by the
square of the height in meters. When BMI is plotted on
age- and gender-appropriate growth charts, overweight
individuals can be identified as those between the 85th
and 95th percentiles for age and gender. It is clear that
this mathematical calculation is rather complex and can
best be determined online by means of a BMI calculator
(http://www.cdc.gov/growthcharts).62 Standards for BMI
values in children are shown in Table 8-3.

146

Chapter 8

n

Nutritional Considerations for the Pediatric Dental Patient

Table 8-3
BMI values and standards for children
Value

Standard

<5th percentile
5th to <85th percentile
85th to <95th percentile
≥95th percentile

Underweight
Normal weight
Overweight
Obese

A major focus of the nationwide health promotion and
disease prevention agenda in Healthy People 2010 was to
reduce the proportions of children and adolescents who
are overweight or obese. Unfortunately, current estimates
are that 36% of U.S. adults are obese, whereas the corresponding value for children and adolescents is 17%.63
This latter figure translates to roughly 12.5 million young
individuals. The prevalence of overweight among children ages 6 to 11 has more than doubled in the past 20
years; the rate among adolescents has more than tripled.
However, several recent reports, including an article
in the Journal of the American Medical Association,64 have
reported a significant reduction in obesity among 2- to
5-year-old children over the past decade. In this latter
study, obesity was defined in children as a BMI > the 95th
percentile of the gender-specific CDC BMI-for-age growth
charts. In adults, obesity was defined as a BMI of 30 and
above. A 43% drop in the obesity rate among 2- to 5-yearold children was an unexpected finding.
Several theories have been proposed to help explain
this observation:
1.	Children are consuming fewer calories provided as
sugary beverages than they did 10 years ago.
2.	More women are breast-feeding their infants, which is
associated with a lower risk of obesity.
3.	There has been a slight overall drop in calories ingested per capita in the past decade.
4.	Some combination of state, local, and federal programs
designed to reduce obesity is beginning to bear fruit.
Regarding the latter idea, First Lady Michelle Obama
led an effort to alter young people’s eating and exercise
behaviors in a healthier direction. Some 10,000 child-care
centers across the country have signed on, and numerous
cities have also been striving to fight obesity by reducing
sugary beverage ingestion and the use of transfats in restaurants. It is encouraging to see progress against obesity
being demonstrated in 2- to 5-year-olds, since reversing
unhealthy eating habits at a later age is difficult. However, a note of caution is necessary. Very young children
comprise only a small fraction of the American population, and other age groups are not showing corresponding declines in obesity rates. For example, women over
60 years of age have shown an increase in obesity during the past decade. Nevertheless, if this trend continues
in young children in America, and expands to the adult
population, we can be more optimistic about ultimately
reversing the obesity epidemic.
There are many consequences of obesity, both shortand long-term. An estimated 61% of overweight youth

have at least one additional risk factor for heart disease,
such as high cholesterol or high blood pressure. Overweight children are at greater risk for bone and joint problems, as well as obstructive sleep apnea, which has been
observed in as many as one in six obese children. The
latter condition can lead to daytime somnolence, neurocognitive abnormalities, and impaired learning. Because
obese children tend to become obese adults, the potential
impact of childhood obesity on the health care system is
enormous. It has been suggested that the increased medical care costs associated with obesity may be greater than
those associated with smoking and drinking alcohol.65
As overweight young people grow older, they are at
increased risk for heart disease, type 2 diabetes mellitus,
stroke, several types of cancer, and osteoarthritis. The
current epidemic of type 2 diabetes escalating in children
and adolescents is associated with obesity and a persistently elevated BMI. Roughly one of four obese children
(aged 4 to 10 years) has been reported as glucose-intolerant.66 This condition is a precursor to diabetes and is a
generic term referring to metabolic conditions resulting
in higher than normal (hyperglycemia) blood glucose levels. A sedentary lifestyle and obesity are associated with
glucose intolerance.
Severe obesity has long been thought to reduce life
expectancy. A recent report states that 20-year-old white
men with a BMI greater than 45 (extreme obesity) are
estimated to lose 13 years of life because of their body
weight.67 In spite of several decades of public health efforts to educate the population regarding the dangers of
obesity, the trend toward progressively increasing body
weight has not abated.
Aside from the obvious health risks associated with
obesity in childhood and adolescence, there are also
significant psychological and quality-of-life issues to be
considered. Ackard and associates reported that objective
overeating with loss of control in adolescents was associated with lower scores on measures of body satisfaction
and self-esteem and higher scores regarding depressive
mood.68 Overeating was also associated with elevated
risk of suicide. Thus objective overeating among adolescents is linked to several adverse behaviors and negative
psychological experiences. It remains to be determined
whether objective overeating is an early warning sign of
psychological distress or, rather, a potential consequence
of compromised psychological health.
Schwimmer and colleagues compared the healthrelated quality of life of obese children and adolescents
with that of both their healthy (non-obese) counterparts
and a cohort of children and adolescents diagnosed with
cancer.69 Quality-of-life ratings of severely obese children
and adolescents were lower than those of healthy children and adolescents and similar to those of children and
adolescents with cancer. An impaired self-image and perception of low quality of life in this population are not
surprising, because obesity is one of the most stigmatizing and least socially acceptable conditions in childhood.
These and similar findings emphasize how critical it is for
health professionals, teachers, and parents to be aware of
not only the medical risks of obesity in children but also
the potential psychological significance of this condition.

Chapter 8

The eating environment existing in contemporary
America often promotes the intake of convenient, relatively inexpensive, highly palatable foods served in large
portions.70 As previously mentioned, this type of eating
pattern from childhood through adult life contributes to
obesity as well as diabetes, hypertension, coronary heart
disease, and certain types of cancer. Regrettably, the factors contributing to future obesity are thought to begin
in infancy and early childhood.71 Since these diseases
only become evident during adulthood, in spite of having their origins in childhood and adolescence, they provide the health care professional with a potential avenue
for preventive medicine. Early intervention approaches
in these population groups may promote healthier eating patterns. Atherosclerotic heart disease is such a case.
Modifiable risk factors can be identified and addressed in
the pediatric population, with the goal of preventing or
ameliorating heart disease in later life. Thus prevention
of coronary heart disease is a pediatric health issue, as is
prevention of the other diseases mentioned earlier.
Epidemiologic studies have identified a web of factors
that can contribute to the obesity epidemic in U.S. children
and adolescents. These influences exist at the individual, family, community, and societal levels. They include
changing meal environments, increased TV viewing and
video game playing, food availability, less parental leisure
time, changes in suburbia that discourage physical activity,
increased concern over neighborhood safety, increased
advertising and availability of high-fat, calorie-dense fast
food, changes in parental work patterns, increased need
for child care, and increased utilization of labor-saving
devices (e.g., cars, computers, smart phones, etc.). Because
the problem is multifactorial, solutions should target
multiple factors. An extensive review of the literature by
Wofford clearly identified the preschool years as a critical
time to intervene in obesity prevention. Parental involvement and a role by health care practitioners in emphasizing recommendations were vital to successful interventions. In addition, prevention strategies should focus on
building positive, healthy behaviors that produce more
satisfactory long-term results than do strategies that focus
on limiting behaviors.72
A classic research study showed that the prevalence
of obesity is lowest among children watching less than
one hour of television a day and highest among those
watching 4 or more hours a day.73 Not only will sedentary
children expend less energy, but they will also invariably
be increasing their consumption of high-fat, high-sugar,
high-calorie snack foods during these sedentary periods.74
Research from roughly two decades ago indicates that
food (typically a sweet snack) is consumed or referred to
3-5 times per half hour on prime-time programming.75
Additionally, the majority of commercials shown during
children’s programming promote foods with low nutritional value, including candy, soft drinks, sugared cereals, and potato chips, as well as other high-salt, high-fat
snacks.76
Any effort to attack the obesity problem should focus
not only on making better food choices but also on increasing physical activity levels, which increases energy
use and helps achieve a healthy weight. Exercise pro-

n

Nutritional Considerations for the Pediatric Dental Patient

147

motes both physical health and emotional well-being.
How much and how often you exercise is a major determinant of both morbidity and mortality. It has been
identified as a national priority area for promoting the
health of the U.S. population.77 However, many children
and adolescents do not meet the recommendations for
physical activity. This fact is particularly sobering because
the adolescent years are thought to be the period during
which adult health-related behaviors such as dietary and
physical activity patterns are being shaped. Childhood is
likely to be a critical time for promoting physical activity.
In 2005 the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
reported that only 27.8% of high school girls and 43.8%
of high school boys participated in at least 60 minutes of
physical activity per day. A comparable report for 201178
showed that this figure had fallen to 18.5% for girls and
38.3% for boys.
Walking as a means of transportation is a component of an active lifestyle associated with a reduced risk
of chronic diseases and an increased sense of well-being;
however, time spent walking has declined among U.S.
children. One of the objectives of Healthy People 2010
was to increase the proportion of walking trips to school
from 31% to 50% among children and adolescents. In
1969 approximately half of all U.S. schoolchildren walked
or biked to and from school; of those living within 1 mile
of school, 87% walked or biked to school. By 2004 fewer
than 15% of children used an active mode of transportation. In 2004 the CDC reported the results of a Consumer
Styles survey of parents that cited distance to school as
the most common barrier to walking to school, followed
by traffic-related dangers.79 The reduction in total physical activity that occurs from mid- to late adolescence appears to be related more to a reduction in the number
of activities in which adolescents choose to participate
than to a decline in the time spent on each activity.80
This finding supports other evidence that physical activity declines during adolescence.
According to the Dietary Guidelines for Americans,
2010, it is recommended that children and adolescents
participate in at least 60 minutes of moderately intense
physical activity most days of the week, preferably daily.
For youth, regular physical activity has beneficial effects
on weight, muscular strength, cardiorespiratory fitness,
bone mass, blood pressure, anxiety, and self-esteem.
Walking programs are being increasingly promoted for
youth in selected school systems. Many of these programs
are using pedometers to register the number of steps being taken. These small units, which clip onto waistbands,
resemble tiny pagers and are reasonably accurate in
counting all the steps taken over a given period of time.
For some programs, the goal is to reach 12,000 steps per
day, but for all the programs, a general objective is to motivate the person wearing the pedometer to progressively
increase the step count over time and to maintain a minimally acceptable level of steps per day.

HEALTH IMPACT OF HIGH SALT INTAKE
When we consider the issue of overnutrition and how it
might relate to health problems, sodium intake generally
emerges as an important topic for consideration. More

148

Chapter 8

n

Nutritional Considerations for the Pediatric Dental Patient

specifically, we question whether children and adolescents are consuming too much sodium from dietary salt
and initiating a behavior of eating that will be problematic during their lifetime. According to a recent study,81
the answer is likely to be “yes.” This team of researchers monitored the eating habits of more than 760 high
school adolescents for a week. They observed that these
teenagers were ingesting as much dietary salt as were their
adult counterparts, an amount far exceeding guidelines
for good health. On average, the teenagers were taking
in almost 3300 mg sodium each day, an amount more
than double the 1500 mg currently recommended by the
American Heart Association.82
An additional finding of the research was that a direct
link existed between the high levels of salt intake and an
increased risk for overweight and obesity. Previous studies83,84 have shown that salt typically promotes the desire
to drink more sugary sodas and consume more calories,
thereby providing a potential mechanism for weight gain.
An elevated sodium intake has often been cited as being associated with an increase in blood pressure, raising
hypertension rates and the risk for heart disease and early
death.85 It has also been suggested that by significantly
reducing the average daily intake of sodium, the general
population could enjoy improved health.
From a dental health perspective, the increased desire
for sugary beverage consumption, triggered by a high-salt
diet, could contribute to dental caries and other harmful
effects. Several strategies to offset these kinds of adverse
oral effects from high-salt diets would be to read food
labels carefully and not choose those with high sodium
content, not to add salt to food via the saltshaker, and to
select fresh fruits and vegetables as food choices whenever possible.

FEEDING AND EATING DISORDERS
Physical appearance is of prime importance for most teenagers, and for some adolescent girls in particular, getting
“thin enough” can become an obsession. It is estimated
that 20 million women and 10 million men suffer from a
clinically significant eating disorder such as anorexia nervosa, bulimia nervosa, or binge-eating disorder at some
point during their lifetime.86 Because women and men
are often secretive about their eating disorders, existing
epidemiologic studies may underestimate the true prevalence of these conditions.87 Some personality traits, such
as perfectionism and obsession with weight and body dissatisfaction, may cluster in families of women with eating disorders. Perfectionism may be an environmental or
genetic factor.88,89
Disordered eating is a term that includes a full spectrum
of unhealthy eating behaviors from inappropriate dieting
to clinical eating disorders.90 The mass media are viewed
by many as major contributors in influencing disordered
eating behaviors in young people through the presentation of often unattainable physical images and emphasis
on the “thin ideal.”91
Analyses of body measurements of 500 models listed
on modeling agency websites and in adult magazines over
a 12-year period showed that nearly all the centerfolds

and three fourths of the models had BMIs that approximated the American Psychological Association’s criteria
for anorexia nervosa.92 Although boys may be increasingly influenced by the portrayals of muscular men in the
media, most research has focused on the effects of media portrayals on girls’ eating and dietary habits. Teenage
girls are most at risk for developing eating disorders as
they struggle with bodies that are getting larger in a culture that simultaneously attempts to sell them junk food
and tells them that they should be thin. A study by Field
found that more than 10% of adolescent girls and 3% of
boys binge-eat or purge at least once a week. Risk factors
for these disordered eating behaviors included frequent
dieting, concerns about weight, and in girls younger than
14 years, maternal history of an eating disorder.93
Research has shown that being overweight in childhood is a risk factor for disordered eating, and both are
risk factors for full-syndrome eating disorders. Shape and
weight concerns appear to be elevated in overweight children and teenagers, especially in white girls. Up to 79%
of overweight youth report unhealthy weight control
behaviors, and up to 17% report extreme weight control
behaviors such as self-induced vomiting or laxative or diuretic abuse.94
A study of risk factors for eating disorders, conducted
by Rohde, Stice, and Marti in a sample of over 400 U.S.
adolescent girls, found that body dissatisfaction, negative effect, pressure to be thin, internalization of the thin
ideal, and dieting were significant predictors of eating disorder development. Findings indicated that although eating disorders tend to manifest in late adolescence, most
of these risk factors assessed are present much earlier, and
that body dissatisfaction appears to present in advance
of any perceived pressure to achieve an ideal thinness.95
Unlike the findings of others,96 this study determined
that BMI was not a predictor for eating disorder development up to age 21, which led the authors to suggest
that subjective dissatisfaction with body shape and size,
rather than actual levels of adiposity, might be a more
important factor in the appearance of eating disorders.95
Likewise, analysis of data from the National Longitudinal
Study of Adolescent Health, a large nationally representative sample of over 14,000 individuals, found that early
dieting, depression, and body image distortion were associated with eating disorders in young adulthood. Prevalence of eating disorders among the males and females in
the sample ranged from 2% to 6%, with the most common being binge eating. Dieting was reported by 27% of
females and 11% of the males.97
Considering the high prevalence of weight-related
concerns and body dissatisfaction among young people
in the United States, it would be prudent to aim appropriate interventions at all youth.

ANOREXIA NERVOSA
Preoccupation with appearance and body weight during
adolescence may lead to anorexia nervosa, a condition of
self-induced starvation. Anorexia may be of the restrictive type, in which food intake is severely limited, or of
the binge-eating/purging type, in which individuals engage in self-induced vomiting or the misuse of laxatives,

Chapter 8

diuretics, or enemas. This illness, which is much less
common in males and is also less common than bulimia nervosa, is characterized by self-imposed weight loss,
amenorrhea, and a distorted attitude toward eating and
body weight. In some instances this behavior is used as
a means of establishing a sense of identity and control.
Anorexia nervosa has captured the interest of psychoanalysts, behavior therapists, family therapists, nutritionists,
and endocrinologists alike because of the interplay among
the powerful psychological, environmental, genetic, and
physiologic components of the disease. Anorexia nervosa rarely begins before puberty and probably is manifest
across a wide range of severity levels. Affected individuals often lack the ability to recognize that their emaciated bodies are too thin. Despite their advanced state of
wasting, they may continue to believe that they are overweight. According to DSM-5, the three diagnostic criteria
for anorexia nervosa are the following98,99:
•	Persistent restriction of energy intake leading to
significantly low body weight (in context of what is
minimally expected for age, gender, developmental
trajectory, and physical health)
•	Either an intense fear of gaining weight or of becoming fat, or persistent behavior that interferes with
weight gain (even though significantly low in body
weight)
•	Disturbance in the way one’s body weight or shape
is experienced, undue influence of body shape and
weight on self-evaluation, or persistent lack of recognition of the seriousness of the current low body
weight
A wide range of complications, including many of
the consequences of starvation, is possible in anorexia
nervosa. Fat depletion is the most obvious physical consequence. Qualitative deficiencies in the diet may lead
to anemia, hypoproteinemia, and sometimes vitamin
deficiencies. Serious electrolyte imbalances, notably hypokalemia, can occur when vomiting or laxative or diuretic abuse is practiced. Anorexia may be accompanied
by enlargement of the parotid glands, edema of the legs,
increased facial hair, and reductions in blood pressure
and pulse rate. Nutritional deficiencies may lead to glossitis, gingivitis, a reduction in the amount and pH of
the saliva, and an increase in dental caries susceptibility.
Dental erosion may be evident on the palatal aspects of
anterior and posterior teeth (perimolysis) secondary to
the use of sports drinks, caffeinated/carbonated drinks,
wine, vinegar, and lemon juice used to quell sensations
of hunger. Anorexics who engage in self-induced vomiting may exhibit epithelial erosion, gingivitis, and dental
erosion on the palatal surfaces of the maxillary anterior
teeth.98
Long-term studies have demonstrated diverse outcomes ranging from full recovery to chronicity and
death. Outpatient treatment is preferred for most individuals. Treatment is typically multidisciplinary and
involves medical, nutritional, social, and psychological
components.100 If the illness is severe and family and environmental circumstances are too damaging, or if there
is little response to outpatient treatment, then hospitalization is indicated. Fluoxetine hydrochloride appears to

n

Nutritional Considerations for the Pediatric Dental Patient

149

help control the obsessive-compulsive behavior involved
in both anorexia nervosa and bulimia. This drug raises
the brain levels of serotonin, and as a consequence, the
urge to binge and the preoccupation with food appear to
lessen.

BULIMIA
Another eating disorder, bulimia nervosa, is characterized by binge eating and invariably by self-induced vomiting. It also is more prevalent in young women and is
more common than is anorexia nervosa. It usually begins
during late adolescence or early adult life. Its prevalence
among males is probably vastly underestimated because
of underreporting. The American Psychiatric Association’s diagnostic criteria for bulimia nervosa are the following99:
•	Eating, in a discrete period of time (e.g., within any
2-hour period), an amount of food that is definitely
larger than what most individuals would eat in a similar period of time under similar circumstances
•	A sense of a lack of control over eating during the
episode (e.g., a feeling that one cannot stop eating or
control what or how much one is eating)
•	Recurrent inappropriate compensatory behaviors to
prevent weight gain, such as self-induced vomiting;
misuse of laxatives, diuretics, or other medications;
fasting; or excessive exercise
•	The binge-eating and compensatory behaviors both
occur, on average, at least once a week for 3 months.
•	Self-evaluation is unduly influenced by body shape
and weight.
•	The disturbance does not occur exclusively during
episodes of anorexia nervosa.
Although it is more medically benign than anorexia
nervosa, bulimia nervosa is associated with significant
health consequences. Approximately half of patients
with this disorder have fluid and electrolyte abnormalities. Hypokalemia develops in a small percentage. Enlargement of the parotid glands, esophagitis, and gastric
necrosis may also occur. Because of the exposure of the
tooth surfaces to the highly acidic regurgitated gastric
contents, enamel erosion is common among patients
with bulimia nervosa. The degree of enamel damage can
be extensive. Although unanimity of opinion does not
exist, the suggestion has been made that toothbrushing
after vomiting actually promotes enamel loss and that,
instead, patients should be instructed to rinse with an alkaline solution such as sodium bicarbonate dissolved in
water. Other suggestions include the use of liquid sugarfree antacids, water, or milk. A fluoride treatment should
be considered because of its potential for remineralizing
previously demineralized areas of the dentition. Daily
rinses with 0.5% sodium fluoride and administration
of a 1.1% neutral fluoride gel in custom trays can be
recommended.
Most bulimic patients can be treated effectively as
outpatients. Although antidepressant medications may
be useful in some cases, a multidisciplinary approach to
treatment is often indicated.100 There is some evidence
that individuals, particularly girls, who have family meals
in a positive atmosphere are at lower risk for bulimia.

150

Chapter 8

n

Nutritional Considerations for the Pediatric Dental Patient

Family meals may serve a protective function against disordered eating as well as other problems by acting as a
forum for working through various issues.101

Q & A CONCERNING PEDIATRIC
NUTRITION ISSUES

BINGE-EATING DISORDER

Why is a nutritious breakfast important to begin the day?
Examined from a nutrient density perspective (nutrients provided per calorie), breakfast is generally the most
important meal of the day; however, 40% of children and
teenagers in America are thought to skip breakfast. Those
who skip it are literally on an unintended 36-hour fast
until lunchtime, and are observed to suffer from more
physical, intellectual, and behavioral problems compared
with those who eat a nutritious breakfast. Eating a healthy
breakfast is associated with improved cognitive function,
memory, reduced tardiness, and improved mood.
Is a vegetarian diet healthy for children?
Since plant-based foods are generally quite nutritious,
a vegetarian diet can be healthful if well planned. An important question is what food items will replace the meat.
If primarily legumes, beans, nuts, and soy products, there
should be no protein inadequacy. If primarily cheese and
whole milk, then there may be concerns over excess calories and saturated fat intake. Planning exclusively vegetarian diets will require careful consideration on how to
receive adequate intakes of protein, iron, and vitamin B12.
Are changes in store for food and nutrition labeling
practices?
The Food and Drug Administration is proposing significant changes in food and nutrition labels for the first
time since such labels became mandatory some 20 years
ago. If the modifications are accepted, calories will appear in larger and bolder type, the consumer will be able
to discern if the food product contains added sugar, and
serving sizes will be adjusted upward to reflect more accurately the amounts that Americans are actually consuming. These changes are scheduled in the future and are
being considered because current food labeling is thought
by many as both outdated and difficult to understand.
Why is healthy eating so important in childhood and
adolescence?
Ingesting nutritious foods early in life initiates an eating behavior that conveys protection against obesity,
diabetes, and dental caries currently and later in life.
Continuing to follow these patterns of eating over a lifetime is associated with a reduction in risk for heart disease, cancer, osteoporosis, hypertension, stroke, and early
death. There are emotional and psychological benefits to
be gained as well.
What are the major concerns regarding unhealthy eating during
childhood?
Eating too few nutrients and calories in childhood
will ultimately negatively affect growth, performance in
school, cognitive development, and overall health. In
contrast, overconsumption of fast food, processed snack
foods, and sugar-sweetened beverages will invariably lead
to weight gain, overweight, obesity, and an increased risk
of diabetes, and may increase the risk for dental caries.
What would a child’s ideal dinner plate look like?
Ideally, half the food on a child’s plate would be fruits
and vegetables. Protein would be provided largely by lean
meats, nuts, and eggs. High-fiber whole-grain breads and
cereals would be served in lieu of refined grains. Fried

Within the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual, Fifth Edition
(DSM-5), released in 2013, binge-eating disorder achieved
official diagnostic recognition. The essential feature of
binge-eating disorder is recurrent episodes of binge eating
that must occur, on average, at least once per week for
three months. It is defined by the consumption of excessive amounts of food along with the sensation of loss of
control. The following are the DSM-599 criteria for this
disorder:
•	Recurrent episodes of binge eating. A recurrent episode is characterized by both of the following:
•	Eating in a discrete period of time (e.g., within any
2-hour period) an amount of food that is definitely
larger than what most people would eat in a similar period of time and under similar circumstances.
•	A sense of a lack of control over eating during the
episode (e.g., a feeling that one cannot stop eating
or control what or how much one is eating).
•	The binge-eating episodes are associated with three or
more of the following:
•	Eating much more rapidly than normal
•	Eating until feeling uncomfortably full
•	Eating large amounts of food when not feeling
hungry
•	Eating alone because of feeling embarrassed by
how much one is eating
•	Feeling disgusted with oneself, depressed, or very
guilty afterward
•	Marked distress regarding binge eating is present.
•	The binge eating occurs, on average, at least once a
week for 3 months.
•	The binge eating is not associated with the recurrent
use of inappropriate compensatory behavior as in bulimia nervosa and does not occur exclusively during
the course of bulimia nervosa or anorexia nervosa.
Patients with binge-eating disorder may be treated as
outpatients in a multidisciplinary manner. In overweight
patients with binge-eating disorder, the goals include
achieving a sustainable weight loss and abstaining from
binge eating. Pharmacotherapy with antidepressants and
selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors has been used. Other
classes of medications, such as antiobesity drugs and anticonvulsants, have also been studied and have shown some
success. Psychotherapy in the form of cognitive-behavioral
therapy has been a popular approach, and other modalities,
such as exercise, self-help, and virtual reality therapy, have
also been tried as adjunctive therapies for binge-eating disorder. Furthermore, some studies indicate that there may
be a benefit to combined behavioral therapy and pharmacotherapy in the treatment of binge-eating disorder; however, more research is needed for a better understanding
of the long-term effects of these treatments. As health care
professionals deal with eating disorders in their patients,
they recognize that primary prevention combined with early detection and treatment clearly helps reduce morbidity
and mortality in affected youth.100

Chapter 8

foods would be limited, and milk and water would be offered instead of sugary fruit drinks and sodas. Of course,
many children would not select such a plate voluntarily.
This is where parents or guardians must help guide the
children’s food selections in a logical and loving manner.
What are harmful dietary fats?
Researchers agree that there are two major types of fat
detrimental to health: saturated fat and fats containing
transfatty acids. Saturated fat comes primarily from animal
foods such as meat, poultry, and certain dairy products.
A high intake of this kind of fat increases LDL cholesterol
levels and elevates the risk for cardiovascular disease. Most
transfatty acids in our diet come as a result of a food manufacturing process known as hydrogenation, in which unsaturated fat is partially hydrogenated to enhance consumer
properties. These latter fatty acids also increase blood levels
of LDL cholesterol and increase the risk for cardiovascular
disease. The U.S. Food and Drug Administration has recently proposed a regulatory change that would essentially
ban artificial transfats from the American diet by no longer
considering them as “generally recognized as safe.”
What are considered as healthful dietary fats?
Monounsaturated fat is found in vegetable oils, fruits,
nuts, legumes, and fish, and has been reported to lower
blood cholesterol and help reduce the risk of heart diseases. This type of fat may also help regulate blood insulin and glucose levels and be of benefit for persons with
type 2 diabetes. Polyunsaturated fat is primarily found in
plant-based foods such as vegetable oils. These oils are
thought to improve blood cholesterol levels, thereby lessening the risk of heart disease. Omega-3 fatty acids appear
to be of particular benefit in preventing heart disease.
These healthful fatty acids are primarily found in fatty,
cold water fish and fish oils. They are present in plant oils
as well, but it is less certain if that source is as effective in
promoting heart health as are fish oils. Omega-3 fatty acid
supplements are not thought to be as beneficial as those
from natural food sources.
Do healthy children need vitamin supplements?
Foods that we consume contain essential vitamins,
minerals, protein, fiber, phytochemicals, and other beneficial chemicals whose roles in human nutrition have not
yet been fully identified. Nutritional supplements do not
contain this range of essential nutrients present within
the natural environment of a food substance. Vitamin
and other supplements are not intended to serve as food
substitutes. Children should be encouraged and helped
to receive their nutrients from foods, rather than from
nutritional supplements.
Are there foods that fight flu and colds?
There are neither specific foods nor nutrients that can
either prevent or cure a cold or influenza. However, some
evidence suggests that there are strategies to help strengthen the immune system and aid in resisting these illnesses.
Examples include getting plenty of sleep, participating in
regular exercise, keeping well hydrated, and minimizing
stress. The foods that may help in this endeavor by contributing protective substances include green leafy vegetables,
highly pigmented vegetables and fruits, citrus fruits, vegetable oils, nuts, whole grains, and seafood. This diverse
collection of foods provides high levels of nutrients such

n

Nutritional Considerations for the Pediatric Dental Patient

151

as beta-carotene, vitamin A, vitamin C, vitamin E, assorted
other antioxidants, and the minerals zinc and selenium, all
of which may fortify the immune system.
Are fruit drinks and juices healthy for children?
Most children enjoy the taste of fruit juices but may
drink them in excess to the exclusion of other more
­nutritious foods. Many fruit drinks are high in added sugar and calories, and even 100% fruit and vegetable juices
are often highly acidic. The outcome of this may be the
intake of too much sugar and calories, thus contributing
to such problems as poor overall nutritional quality of the
diet, obesity, as well as enamel erosion and dental caries.
Far more acceptable dietary choices than fruit drinks and
juices are whole fruits, low-fat dairy, or water.
Are meal replacement shakes and smoothies good snack
­choices for children and adolescents?
The consumption of fruit-/vegetable- or protein-based
smoothies and shakes has become popular in recent years.
These products are often high in acid, sugar, and fermentable carbohydrates. If kids and teenagers are consuming
such meal replacement beverages multiple times per day
as snacks, the amount of time the oral cavity is exposed
to a reduction in pH is increased, which increases the risk
of demineralization, enamel erosion, and dental caries.
More healthful choices would include non-cariogenic
snacks of solid foods such as nuts, cheese, popcorn, milk,
yogurt, and raw vegetables.
Are diet sodas and sports/energy drinks harmful to children
and adolescents?
Diet sodas are popular among children and teenagers
and are perceived as healthier than sugared beverages; in
addition, they are often used by youth concerned about
gaining weight. Sports and energy drinks are also marketed
as “healthy” alternatives to regular soda and as a means
to obtain better physical performance or maintain alertness. The American College of Sports Medicine recommends consumption of adequate food and fluids before,
during, and after exercise to help maintain blood glucose
during exercise, maximize performance, and improve
recovery time; consumption of sport drinks containing
carbohydrates and electrolytes during intense exercise periods lasting longer than 1 hour may be helpful in refueling
muscles and decreasing the risk of dehydration. However,
for shorter exercise periods, consumption of plain water is
recommended. The so-called energy drinks are often high
in caffeine, and adverse cardiovascular events have been
reported with their use in some individuals. Moreover,
these beverages are often highly acidic and can cause
dissolution of tooth enamel.
Additionally, although diet sodas do not contain sugar, sports and energy drinks often do, and whether they
contain sugar or not, excessive consumption of any of
these beverages can be harmful to oral health. These beverages contain acids such as phosphoric and citric acid,
which can contribute to enamel erosion and dental caries, particularly if the consumer sips on these products
throughout the day.
How common are food allergies?
It is estimated that 3% to 4% of the American population
is affected by food allergies, generally affecting the digestive
or respiratory system or the skin. True food allergies have

152

Chapter 8

n

Nutritional Considerations for the Pediatric Dental Patient

a sudden onset and occur whenever the offending food is
eaten. The most common culprits are nuts, fish or shellfish,
milk, eggs, soy, and wheat, with symptoms ranging from
mild to potentially life threatening. They are caused by an
allergic response by the immune system to a food component, mistakenly thought to pose a threat to the body. The
resulting biologic reaction against the allergen produces
the symptoms. In contrast, food intolerances have a more
gradual onset, are generally less severe, and do not have a
fatal outcome. These food sensitivities are usually produced
by stomach irritation and improper food digestion. Lactoseintolerance is probably the most common food intolerance.
Gluten may produce either an allergic response or a sensitivity reaction. Once the offending food allergen has been
identified, the primary treatment is to remove that item
from the diet permanently. Food intolerances can be treated
more easily. Simply reducing the quantity of the offending
food that is eaten, and also the frequency of its ingestion,
can alleviate most symptoms.
Is the gluten in foods a common problem for children and adolescents?
Gluten is a mixture of proteins found in foods processed
from wheat and other grains. Roughly 1% of the U.S. population suffers from celiac disease, which is an autoimmune
disease of the small intestine in which the individual is
intolerant to gluten in the diet. Those affected generally
exhibit a broad range and severity of intestinal symptoms.
Perhaps 6% of the population may be affected by non-celiac
gluten intolerance/sensitivity, which is usually a less severe
gastrointestinal condition and does not fall into the conventional autoimmune disease category. These ailments are
often helped by avoiding gluten in the diet, which is sometimes a difficult task to accomplish in view of the rather
ubiquitous distribution, albeit at low concentrations, of
gluten in a variety of food products. An important first step
for sufferers is to receive an accurate diagnosis from a physician to determine the best treatment approach.
Are there any “addictive” foods?
An addiction is simply defined as a powerful and harmful need to have regular access to something (such as a
drug) or participate in an activity (such as gambling). The
definition becomes less clear when applied to food addictions. Some scientists feel that certain foods behave similarly to addictive drugs and cause a release of “feel good”
chemicals in the brain when they are eaten. Others disagree, insisting that overeating is basically an emotional
problem, not one of an addiction. A few studies have identified chocolate, sugar, and cheese as likely suspects in the
addictive foods category. All three have been demonstrated at times to promote the release of opiate-like substances
that stimulate the brain’s pleasure center and promote the
eating of these foods frequently and compulsively.

REFERENCES
1.	Hoyert D, et al.: Deaths: Preliminary Data for 2011, National
Vital Statistics Reports 61(6):1–51, Oct 10, 2012.
2.	Samieri C, et al.: The association between dietary patterns
at midlife and health in aging, Ann Intern Med 159(9):
584–591, 2013.
3.	
CIA World Fact Book, World Life Expectancies, 2011.

4.	U.S. Department of Health and Human Services: Nutrition
and weight status. http://www.healthypeople.gov/2020/
default.aspx, 2014.
5.	U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. Office of Disease Prevention and Health Promotion. 2014. http://www
.health.gov/dietaryguidelines/2010.asp.
6.	
United States Department of Agriculture (USDA). http://
choosemyplate.gov.
7.	Briefel RR, Johnson CL: Secular trends in dietary intake in
the United States, Annu Rev Nutr 24:401–431, 2004.
8.	ADA Reports: Position of the American Dietetic Association: dietary guidance for healthy children ages 2-11 years,
J Am Diet Assoc 104(4):660–667, 2004.
9.	Enns CW, Mickle SJ, Goldman JD: Trends in food and nutrient intakes by children in the United States, Fam Econ Nutr
Rev 14(2):56–68, 2002.
10.	Fulgoni EL, Quann EE: National trends in beverage consumption in children from birth to 5 years: analysis of
NHANES across three decades, Nutr J 31:11–92, 2012 Oct.
11.	Han E, Powell LM: Consumption patterns of sugar-sweetened
beverages in the United States, J Acad Nutr Diet 113(1):43–53,
2013.
12.	Dubois L, et al.: Regular sugar-sweetened beverage consumption between meals increases risk of overweight among
preschool-aged children, J Am Diet Assoc 107(6):924–935,
2007.
13.	Hu FB: Resolved: there is sufficient scientific evidence that
decreasing sugar-sweetened beverage consumption will reduce the prevalence of obesity and obesity-related diseases,
Obes Rev 14(8):606–609, 2013.
14.	Kosova EC, Auinger P, Bremer AA: The relationships between sugar-sweetened beverage intake and cardiometabolic markers in young children, J Acad Nutr Diet 113(2):
219–227, 2013.
15.	Slining MM, Mathias KC, Popkin BM: Trends in food and
beverage sources among US children and adolescents: 19892010, J Acad Nutr Diet 113(12):1683–1694, 2013.
16.	Reedy J, Krebs-Smith SM: Dietary sources of energy, solid
fats, and added sugars among children and adolescents
in the United States, J Am Diet Assoc 110(10):1477–1484,
2010.
17.	Ford CN, Slining MM, Popkin BM: Trends in dietary intake
among US 2- to 6-year-old children, 1989-2008, J Acad Nutr
Diet 113(1):35–42, 2013.
18.	Moore LL, et al.: Food group intake and micronutrient adequacy in adolescent girls, Nutrients 4(11):1692–1708, 2012.
19.	Iannotti RJ, Wang J: Trends in physical activity, sedentary
behavior, diet, and BMI among US adolescents, 2001-2009,
Pediatrics 132(4):606–614, 2013.
20.	USDA: Food and Nutrition Service National School Lunch
Program (NSLP) 2013. http://www.fns.usda.gov/sites
/default/files/NSLPFactSheet.pdf Accessed March 2014.
21.	Briefel RR, Wilson A, Gleason PM: Consumption of lownutrient, energy-dense foods and beverages at school, home,
and other locations among school lunch participants and
nonparticipants, J Am Diet Assoc 109(2 Suppl):S79–S90, 2009.
22.	Clark MA, Fox MK: Nutritional quality of the diets of US
public school children and the role of the school meal programs, J Am Diet Assoc 109(2 Suppl):S44–S56, 2009.
23.	Grimes CA, et al.: Dietary sodium intake is associated with
total fluid and sugar-sweetened beverage consumption in
US children and adolescents aged 2-18 y: NHANES 20052008, Am J Clin Nutr 98(1):189–196, 2013.
24.	Ohri-Vachaspati P, Turner L, Chaloupka FJ, Fruit Fresh,
Vegetable: Program participation in elementary schools in
the United States and availability of fruits and vegetables in
school lunch meals, J Acad Nutr Diet 112(6):921–926, 2012.

Chapter 8

25.	Evans CE, et al: Systematic review and meta-analysis of
school-based interventions to improve daily fruit and vegetable intake in children aged 5 to 12 y, Am J Clin Nutr
96(4):889–901. Epub 2012 Sep 5.
26.	Guthrie JF, Lin BH, Frazao E: Role of food prepared away
from home in the American diet, 1977-78 versus 1994-96:
changes and consequences, J Nutr Educ Behav 34(3):140–150,
2002.
27.	Poti JM, Popkin BM: Trends in energy intake among US
children by eating location and food source, 1977-2006,
J Am Diet Assoc 111(8):1156–1164, 2011.
28.	Powell LM, Nguyen BT: Fast-food and full-service restaurant consumption among children and adolescents: effect
on energy, beverage, and nutrient intake, JAMA Pediatrics
167(1):14–20, 2013.
29.	Larson N, et al.: Eating breakfast and dinner together as a
family: associations with sociodemographic characteristics
and implications for diet quality and weight status, J Acad
Nutr Diet 113(12):1601–1609, 2013.
30.	Lachat C, et al.: Eating out of home and its association with
dietary intake: a systematic review of the evidence, Obes Rev
13(4):329–346, 2011.
31.	Bezerra IN, Curioni C, Sichieri R: Association between eating
out of home and body weight, Nutr Rev 70(2):65–79, 2012.
32.	Young L, Nestle M: Expanding portion sizes in the U.S. marketplace: implications for nutrition counseling, J Am Diet
Assoc 103(2):231–234, 2003.
33.	Piernas C, Popkin BM: Increased portion sizes from energydense foods affect total energy intake at eating occasions
in US children and adolescents: patterns and trends by age
group and sociodemographic characteristics, 1977-2006,
Am J Clin Nutr 94(5):1324–1332, 2011.
34.	Larson N, Story M: A review of snacking patterns among
children and adolescents: what are the implications of
snacking for weight status? Child Obes 9(2):104–115, 2013.
35.	Koletzko B, Toschke AM: Meal patterns and frequencies: do
they affect body weight in children and adolescents? Crit
Rev Food Sci Nutr 50(2):100–105, 2010.
36.	Wansink B, van Kleef E: Dinner Rituals that correlate with
child and adult BMI, Obesity (Silver Spring), 22(5):E91–E95,
2014. (doi: 10.1002/oby.20629). Epub 2013 Dec 19.
37.	Berge JM, et al.: Structural and interpersonal characteristics of
family meals: associations with adolescent body mass index
and dietary patterns, J Acad Nutr Diet 113(6):816–822, 2013.
38.	Neumark-Sztainer D, et al.: Changes in the frequency of
family meals from 1999 to 2010 in the homes of adolescents: trends by sociodemographic characteristics, J Adolesc
Health 5(2):201–206, 2012.
39.	Child Welfare League of America 2013. http://www.cwla
.org/programs/health/healthtipsmalnutrition.htm. Accessed
March 10, 2013.
40.	Knol LL, Haughton B, Fitzhugh EC: Dietary patterns of young,
low-income US children, J Am Diet Assoc 105(11):1765–1773,
2005.
41.	
United States Department of Agriculture Economic Research Service, 2014. Available at. http://www.ers.usda
.gov/topics/food-nutrition-assistance/food-security-in-the
-us.aspx#.Ux87hoWwXwo. Accessed March 8, 2014.
42.	Coleman-Jensen A, Nord M, Singh A: Household Food Security in the United States in 2012, Table 1B.USDA ERS,
2013. http://feedingamerica.org/hunger-in-america/hungerfacts/child-hunger-facts.aspx#_edn10.
43.	Ryu JH, Bartfeld JS: Household food insecurity during childhood and subsequent health status: the early childhood
longitudinal study—kindergarten cohort, Am J Public Health
102(11):e50–e55, 2012.

n

Nutritional Considerations for the Pediatric Dental Patient

153

44.	McLaughlin KA, et al.: Food insecurity and mental disorders
in a national sample of U.S. adolescents, J Am Acad Child
Adolesc Psychiatry 51(12):1293–1303, 2012.
45.	Franklin B, et al.: Exploring mediators of food insecurity
and obesity: a review of recent literature, J Community
Health 37(1):253–264, 2012.
46.	Metallinos-Katsaras E, Must A, Gorman K: A longitudinal
study of food insecurity on obesity in preschool children,
J Acad Nutr Diet 112(12):1949–1958, 2012.
47.	
The Third School Nutrition Dietary Assessment Study:
Findings and Policy Implications for Improving the Health
of U.S. Children, J Am Diet Assoc 109(Suppl):S1–S136, 2009.
48.	Kids and Vitamin D Deficiency: American Academy of Pediatrics, Online publication, Oct 17, 2012.
49.	Black M: Effects of vitamin B12 and folate deficiency on
brain development in children, Food Nutr Bull 29(2 Suppl):
S126–S131, 2008. NIH Public Access.
50.	Baker R, Greer F: Diagnosis and prevention of iron deficiency and iron-deficiency anemia in infants and children (0-3
years of age), Pediatrics 126(5):1040–1050, 2010.
51.	Kurugol Z, et al.: The prophylactic and therapeutic effectiveness of zinc sulphate on common colds in children,
Acta Paediatr 95(10):1175–1181, 2006.
52.	Singh M: Zinc for the common cold, Cochrane Database Syst
Rev 6:CD001364, 2013.
53.	Briefel R, et al.: Zinc intake of the US population: findings
from the third national health and nutrition examination
survey, 1988-1994, J Nutr 130(5 Supplement):1367–1373S,
2000.
54.	Keye E: Bone health and oral health, J Sch Health 77(10):
701–705, 2007.
55.	Patrick R, Ames B: Vitamin D hormone regulates serotonin
synthesis. Part 1: relevance for autism, FASEB J Online pub,
Feb 20, 2014.
56.	Weng F, et al.: Risk factors for low serum 25-hydroxyvitamin D concentrations in otherwise healthy children and
adolescents, Am J Clin Nutr 86(1):150–158, 2007.
57.	Cushman K, et al.: Low vitamin D status adversely affects
bone health parameters in adolescents, Am J Clin Nutr
87(4):1039–1044, 2008.
58.	Vitamin D: Supplements for Infants, American Academy of
Pediatrics, March, 2010. On-line reference.
59.	
Neurologic impairment in children associated with maternal dietary deficiency of cobalamin—Georgia, 2001,
MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 52(4):61–64, 2003.
60.	Palmer C: Vitamins today. In Diet and nutrition in oral health,
ed 2, New Jersey, 2007, Prentice Hall. (Chapter 9.)
61.	Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. 1600 Clifton
Road Atlanta, GA 30329-4027, USA.
62.	Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, National Center for Health Statistics. Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention 1600 Clifton Road Atlanta, GA 30329-4027
USA.
63.	Centers for Disease Control and Prevention 1600 Clifton
Road Atlanta, GA 30329-4027 USA. Available at: http://
www.cdc.gov/obesity/childhood/index.html.
64.	Ogden CL, et al.: Prevalence of childhood and adult obesity in the United States, 2011-2012, J Am Med Assoc 311(8):
806–814, 2014.
65.	Sturm R: The effects of obesity, smoking, and drinking on
medical problems and costs: obesity outranks both smoking
and drinking in its deleterious effects on health and health
costs, Health Aff (Millwood) 21(2):245–253, 2002.
66.	Sinha R, et al.: Prevalence of impaired glucose tolerance
among children and adolescents with marked obesity,
N Engl J Med 346(11):802–810, 2002.

154

Chapter 8

n

Nutritional Considerations for the Pediatric Dental Patient

67.	Fontaine K, et al.: Years of life lost due to obesity, J Am Med
Assoc 289(2):187–193, 2003.
68.	Ackard DM, et al.: Overeating among adolescents: prevalence and associations with weight-related characteristics
and psychological health, Pediatrics 111(1):67–74, 2003.
69.	Schwimmer JB, Burwinkle TM, Varni JW: Health-related
quality of life of severely obese children and adolescents,
J Am Med Assoc 289(14):1813–1819, 2003.
70.	Rolls B, Morris E, Roe L: Portion size of food affects energy
intake in normal-weight and overweight men and women,
Am J Clin Nutr 76(6):1207–1213, 2002.
71.	Savage J, et al.: Parental influence on eating behavior, J Law
Med Ethics 35(1):22–34, 2007.
72.	Wofford L: Systematic review of childhood obesity prevention, J Ped Nurs 23(1):5–19, 2008.
73.	Crespo CJ, et al.: Television watching, energy intake, and
obesity in U.S. children: results from the third National
Health and Nutrition Examination Survey, 1988-1994, Arch
Pediatr Adolesc Med 155(3):360–365, 2001.
74.	Vader AM, et al.: Television viewing and snacking behaviors of fourth- and eighth-grade school children in Texas,
Prev Chronic Dis 6(3):489, 2009. On-line reference.
75.	Story M, Faulkner P: The prime time diet: a content analysis
of eating and food messages in television content and commercials, Am J Public Health 80(6):738–740, 1990.
76.	Taras HL, Gage M: Advertised foods on children’s television, Arch Pediatr Adolesc Med 149(6):649–652, 1995.
77.	
CDC: Youth Risk Behavior Surveillance–United States,
2011, MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 61:2012.
78.	Pate R, O’Neill J: Physical activity guidelines for young children, JAMA Pediatrics 166(12):1095–1096, 2012.
79.	Centers for Disease Control: Barriers to children walking
to or from school–United States, 2004: MMWR Morb Mortal
Wkly Rep 54(38):949–952, 2005.
80.	Aaron DJ, et al.: Longitudinal study of the number and
choice of leisure time physical activities from mid to late
adolescence: implications for school curricula and community recreation programs, Arch Pediatr Adolesc Med
156(11):1075–1080, 2002.
81.	Zhu H, et al.: Dietary sodium, adiposity and inflammation
in healthy adolescents, Pediatrics 133(3):e635–e642, 2014.
82.	
American Heart Association Advisory Recommendation:
Consume no more than 1500 mg of sodium a day, Jan 13,
2011.
83.	He F, et al.: Salt intake, hypertension, and obesity in children, Hypertension 51(3):629–634, 2008.
84.	Grimes C, et al.: Dietary salt intake, sugar-sweetened beverage consumption, and obesity risk, Pediatrics 131(1):14–21,
2013.

85.	Mugavero K, et al.: Reducing sodium intake at the community level: the Sodium Reduction in Communities program,
Prev Chronic Dis 9:E168, 2012 (doi: 10.5888/pcd9.120081).
86.	Wade TD, Keski-Rahkonen A, Hudson J: Epidemiology of
eating disorders. In Tsuang M, Tohen M, editors: Textbook
in psychiatric epidemiology, ed. 3, New York, 2011, Wiley, pp
343–360.
87.	Faine MP: Recognition and management of eating disorders in the dental office, Dent Clin North Am 47(2):395–410,
2003.
88.	Woodside D, et al.: Personality, perfectionism, and attitudes toward eating in parents of individuals with eating
disorders, Int J Eat Disord 31(3):290–299, 2002.
89.	Keel PK, Forney KJ: Psychosocial risk factors for eating disorders, Int J Eat Disord 46(5):433–439, 2013.
90.	Sherman RT, Thompson RA: The female athlete triad, J Sch
Nurs 20(4):197–202, 2004.
91.	Fernandez S, Pritchard M: Relationships between selfesteem, media influence and drive for thinness, Eat Behav
13(4):321–325, 2012.
92.	Brown JK, Witherspoon EM: The mass media and American
adolescents’ health, J Adolesc Health 31(Suppl 66):153–170,
2002.
93.	Field EM, et al.: Family, peer, and media predictors of
becoming eating disordered, Arch Pediatr Adolesc Med
162(6):574–579, 2008.
94.	Goldschmidt A, et al.: Disordered eating attitudes and behaviors in overweight youth, Obesity 16(2):257–264, 2008.
95.	Rohde P, Stice E, Marti CN: Development and predictive
effects of eating disorder risk factors during adolescence:
implications for prevention efforts, Int J Eat Disord, Mar 6,
2014 (doi: 10.1002/eat.22270). [Epub ahead of print].
96.	Micali N et al: Frequency and patterns of eating disorder
symptoms in early adolescence, J Adolesc Health 2014 May;
54(5):574-581 (doi: 10.1016/j.jadohealth). 2013. 10.200.
Epub 2013 Dec 17.
97.	Liechty JM, Lee MJ: Longitudinal predictors of dieting and
disordered eating among young adults in the U.S., Int J Eat
Disord 46(8):790–800, 2013.
98.	Lo Muzio L, et al.: Eating disorders: a threat for women’s
health. Oral manifestations in a comprehensive review,
Minerva Stomatolog 56(5):281–292, 2007.
99.	Attia E, et al.: Feeding and eating disorders in DSM-5, Am
J Psychiatry 170(11):1237–1239, 2013.
100.	Treasure J, Claudino AM, Zucker N: Eating disorders, Lancet
375(9714):583–593, 2010.
101.	Neumark-Sztainer DR, et al.: Shared risk and protective factors for overweight and disordered eating in adolescents,
Am J Prev Med 33(5):359–369, 2007.

CHAPTER

9

Dental Caries in the Child
and Adolescent
s Judith R. Chin, Joan E. Kowolik, and George K. Stookey

For additional resources, please visit the

website.

CHAPTER OUTLINE
DENTIST’S ROLE IN THE CARIES
CONTROL PROGRAM
ETIOLOGY OF DENTAL CARIES
CARIES PREVALENCE IN PRESCHOOL
CHILDREN
CARIES PREVALENCE IN
SCHOOLCHILDREN
RAMPANT DENTAL CARIES
EARLY CHILDHOOD CARIES, SEVERE
EARLY CHILDHOOD CARIES,
NURSING CARIES, BABY BOTTLE
TOOTH DECAY
ADDITIONAL FACTORS KNOWN
TO INFLUENCE DENTAL CARIES
Saliva
Socioeconomic Status
Anatomic Characteristics of the
Teeth

Arrangement of the Teeth in the
Arch
Presence of Dental Appliances
and Restorations
Hereditary Factors
EARLY DETECTION OF DISEASE
ACTIVITY
PREDICTION OF PATIENTS’ RISK
FOR FUTURE DISEASE (RISK
ASSESSMENT)
CONTROL OF DENTAL CARIES
Control of All Active Caries Lesions
Reduction in the Intake of Freely
Fermentable Carbohydrates
Reduction of Dental Plaque (and
Microorganisms) with Good Oral
Hygiene Procedures

DENTIST’S ROLE IN THE CARIES
CONTROL PROGRAM
Good oral health is an integral component of good general
health. This would include a Dental Home, which is defined
as “the ongoing relationship between the dentist and team
and the patient, inclusive of all aspects of oral health care
delivered in a comprehensive, continuously accessible, coordinated, and family-centered way. Establishment of a dental
home begins no later than 12 months of age and includes
referral to dental specialists when appropriate.”1-3 Children
should receive their first dental examination between 6
and 12 months of age. In a comprehensive report prepared
for the Oral Health Subcommittee of the Healthy Mothers–Healthy Babies Coalition, Ripa states, “Priority needs to
be given to a major national educational program directed
toward educating the public about nursing caries.”4,5 The
educational program must involve direct contact with pregnant women, parents, and other caregivers in population
subgroups with a high prevalence of nursing caries.
Although enjoying good oral health includes more
than just having healthy teeth, many children have inadequate oral and general health because of active and
uncontrolled dental caries. According to the United States
Surgeon General’s report on oral health in America,
published in May 2000, dental caries is the single most

Use of Fluorides and Topical
Antimicrobial Agents
DIAGNOSTIC TOOLS
Infrared Laser Fluorescence
(DIAGNOdent)
Digital Imaging Fiberoptic
Transillumination
Quantitative Light Fluorescence
OTHER PREVENTIVE THERAPIES
Chlorhexidine and Thymol
Povidone-Iodine
Xylitol
Caries Vaccine
Dental Caries Activity Tests
DENTIST’S ROLE IN THE CARIES
CONTROL PROGRAM

c­ommon chronic childhood disease.2 Over the last 60
years, we have seen the meaning of oral health evolve
from a narrow focus on teeth and gingiva to the recognition that the mouth is the center of vital tissues and functions that are critical to total health and well-being across
the life span. The mouth is a mirror of health or disease,
which acts as an accessible model for the study of other tissues and organs. The mouth is the potential source of pathology, which may affect other systems and organs, but
also provides the impetus for extensive future research.2
Dental caries is five times more common than asthma and
seven times more common than hay fever. These statistics
continue and were reaffirmed by the United States Surgeon General’s report in 2010.3 Furthermore, as Edelstein
and Douglass noted, dental caries is not self-limiting,
like the common cold, nor amenable to treatment with
a simple course of antibiotics, like an ear infection.4 After
analyzing the National Health Interview Survey data from
1993 through 1996, Newacheck and colleagues concluded
that dental care is the most prevalent unmet health need
among American children.6 Although effective methods
are known for prevention and management of dental disease, the unmet need for treatment, especially in children,
does not seem to be diminishing.7 Gift has estimated that
51 million school hours per year are lost in the United
States because of dental-related illness.8
155

156

Chapter 9

n

Dental Caries in the Child and Adolescent

ETIOLOGY OF DENTAL CARIES
The development of dental caries may be considered as a
continuous dynamic process involving repeating periods
of demineralization by organic acids of microbial origin
and subsequent remineralization by salivary components
(or therapeutic agents), but in which the overall oral environment is imbalanced toward demineralization. Several
factors influence the degree of vulnerability of the tooth.9
Today all experts on dental caries generally agree that it is
an infectious and communicable disease and that multiple
factors influence its initiation and progression. The disease
is recognized to require a host (tooth in the oral environment), a dietary substrate, and aciduric bacteria.9 The saliva
(also considered a host component), the substrate, and the
bacteria form a biofilm (plaque) that adheres to the tooth
surface. Over time the presence of the substrate serves as a
nutrient for the bacteria, and the bacteria produce acids that
can demineralize the tooth. The flow, dilution, buffering,
and remineralizing capacity of saliva are also recognized to
be critical factors that affect, and in some ways regulate, the
progression and regression of the disease. If the oral environment is balanced and favorable, saliva can contribute
to strengthening of the tooth by supplying the components
known to help build strong apatite structure. If the oral
environment is unfavorable (too much acid is produced too
often), an adequate flow of saliva can help dilute and buffer
the acid, and thus slow the rate of damage to the tooth or
even repair it. The critical pH for dissolution of enamel has
been shown to be about 5.5. Once the process reaches dentin, dissolution can occur at a considerably higher pH. In
addition, we know of many anatomic, behavioral, dietary,
genetic, social, cultural, socioeconomic, and therapeutic
variables that can significantly influence the level of caries
activity favorably or unfavorably.10
Dental caries is a preventable disease; it typically begins in enamel and progresses slowly in its early stages.
Rampant caries is an exception to the typical course and
is discussed later. Cavitation of the tooth structure is a
late-stage development of the disease. Before cavitation,
the progress of the disease may be arrested or reversed if
a favorable oral environment can be achieved. Even after cavitation occurs, if the pulp is not yet involved and
if the cavitated area is open enough to be self-cleansing
(plaque-free), the caries process can halt and the lesion
can become “arrested.” Arrested lesions typically exhibit
much coronal destruction, but the remaining exposed
dentin is hard and usually very dark, there is no evidence
of pulpal damage, and the patient has no pain. We also
must emphasize that treating a caries-affected tooth by
providing a restoration does not cure the disease. If the
unfavorable oral environment that caused the cavity persists, so will the disease, and more restorations will be required in time. Treating the oral infection by reducing the
number of cariogenic microorganisms and establishing a
favorable oral environment to promote predominantly
remineralization of tooth structure over time will arrest
the caries process and limit the disease. Arresting the
disease currently requires modifications by the patient
or caregiver and relies on the individual’s compliance in
making the necessary modifications.

Many microorganisms can produce enough acid to
demineralize tooth structure, particularly aciduric streptococci, lactobacilli, diphtheroids, yeasts, staphylococci,
and certain strains of sarcinae. The mutans streptococci
(MS) has been implicated as among the major and most
virulent of the caries-producing organisms. Consequently, MS has been targeted in a large share of research.
­Loesche conducted an extensive review of the literature
regarding the etiology of caries.11 He concluded that the
evidence suggests that MS, possibly Streptococcus sobrinus,
and lactobacilli are human odontopathogens. He stated
that aciduricity appears to be the most consistent attribute of MS and is associated with its cariogenicity. He also
observed that other aciduric species, such as S. sobrinus,
may be more important in smooth-surface decay and are
perhaps associated with rampant caries. Loesche concluded the review with the suggestion that treatment strategies that interfere with the colonization of MS may have
a profound effect on the incidence of caries in humans.11
Wan and colleagues published a series of three papers
that report on 111 infants whom they observed to 2 years
of age. They found MS colonization in infants as young as
3 months, and more than 50% of the predentate infants
were infected by 6 months of age. By 24 months of age,
84% of the children harbored the bacteria.12-14 Investigations by Davey and Rogers15 and by Berkowitz and Jones16
have confirmed that MS is transmitted orally from mother
to infant, whereas Brown and colleagues17 have demonstrated a relationship between the numbers of MS present
in mothers and those in their infants. Research by Kohler
and colleagues demonstrated that reducing the numbers
of oral MS in mothers delayed the colonization of the organisms in the mouths of their children.18 Their findings
also showed that 52% of the children who carried mutans
streptococci at 3 years of age had caries, whereas only 3%
of the children without demonstrable MS had caries at
the same age. Caufield and colleagues suggested the possibility of a “window of infectivity” between 19 and 33
months of age during which most children acquire the
cariogenic organisms.19 The mother was the most common source of transmission of the bacteria to the child.
In a group of 122 children from 6 to 24 months of age,
Mohan and colleagues found oral MS colonization in
20% of the children younger than 14 months of age.20
In addition, logistic regression models that controlled
for both age and number of teeth indicated that children
who consumed sweetened beverages in their baby bottles
were four times more likely to have MS than were children who consumed only milk. All experts agree that the
earlier transmission occurs, the higher the caries risk.
The acids that initially demineralize the enamel have
a pH of 5.5 to 5.2 or less and are formed in the plaque
biofilm material, which firmly attaches to the tooth structure. This biofilm, which exists primarily in the susceptible areas of the teeth (i.e., occlusal and facial surfaces), has
received a great deal of attention. Considerable emphasis
is currently being given to plaque and its relationship to
oral disease. Methods of chemical plaque control are being investigated. The acids involved in the initiation of
the caries process are normal metabolic byproducts of the
microorganisms and are generated by the metabolism of

Chapter 9

carbohydrates. Because the outer surface of enamel is far
more resistant to demineralization by acid than is the
deeper portion of enamel, the greatest amount of demineralization occurs 10 to 15 μm beneath the enamel surface
(Fig. 9-1). The continuation of this process results in the
formation of an incipient subsurface enamel lesion that
is first observed clinically as a so-called white spot. Unless
the demineralization is arrested or reversed (remineralization), the subsurface lesion continues to enlarge, with the
eventual collapse of the thin surface layer and the formation of a cavitated lesion.21,22
Remineralization of incipient subsurface lesions may
occur as long as the surface layer of the enamel remains
intact. Saliva, which is supersaturated with calcium and
phosphate and has acid-buffering capability, diffuses
into plaque, where it neutralizes the microbial acids and
repairs the damaged enamel. The time required for re­
­
mineralization to replace the hydroxyapatite lost during
demineralization is determined by the age of the plaque,
the nature of the carbohydrate consumed, and the ­presence

Surface zone

Body of
the lesion

A

DEJ

B
Figure 9-1 Polarized light appearance of natural subsurface

caries lesion. A, Blue/green line represents surface zone;
yellow/brown represents the most demineralized area, the
body of the lesion. B, More advanced natural subsurface
lesion reaching the dentino-enamel junction (DEJ). This
would be a white-spot lesion. (Courtesy Dr. James Wefel.)

n

Dental Caries in the Child and Adolescent

157

or absence of fluoride. For example, it has been suggested
that, in the presence of dental plaque that has developed
for 12 hours or less, the enamel demineralization resulting
from a single exposure to sucrose will be r­ emineralized by
saliva within about 10 minutes. In contrast, a period of at
least 4 hours is required for saliva to repair the damage to
enamel resulting from a similar exposure to sucrose in the
presence of dental plaque that is 48 or more hours old.
The presence of fluoride has a profound effect on the re­
mineralization process; fluoride not only greatly enhances
the rate of remineralization of enamel by saliva but also
results in the formation of fluorohydroxyapatite during
the process, which increases the resistance of the remineralized enamel to future attack by acids. Fluoride also has
antimicrobial effects.21

CARIES PREVALENCE IN PRESCHOOL
CHILDREN
Edelstein and Tinanoff found that 30.5% of 200 preschool
children had caries detectable by visual or radiographic examination.23 These children were recruited from a private
pediatric dental office and ranged in age from 5 months
to 5 years 11 months (mean, 3 years 8 months). Several
other studies in the United States report caries prevalence
in children age 4 years and under as ranging from 38% to
49%.7,24,25 In general, other reports of caries prevalence
among children in various parts of the world show rates
that seem to be comparable with those cited here. Another common element of caries prevalence in the United States and throughout the world is that children from
families in low socioeconomic groups consistently have
greater caries prevalence than their peers from families
at a higher socioeconomic level. Vargas and colleagues
reported that 27.4% of a sample of 3889 children from
2 to 5 years of age had at least one decayed or filled primary tooth.26 These children were part of a larger sample
of individuals included in the third National Health and
Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES III, 1988-1994).
This sample of children was 51.4% male and 48.6% female, with an ethnic distribution of 64.1% non-Hispanic
white, 16.0% black, 9.5% Mexican American, and 10.4%
other ethnicities. The family incomes for these children
were distributed into four groups categorized from low to
high, and these groups constituted 27.9%, 25.5%, 21.6%,
and 24.9% of the sample, respectively.
In a longitudinal evaluation of caries patterns in 317
children followed up for an average of 7.8 years in private
dental practices, Greenwell and colleagues made several
noteworthy discoveries.27 They found that 84% of the
children who were caries-free in the primary dentition
remained caries-free in the mixed dentition. Children
with pit-and-fissure caries in the primary dentition were
more likely to develop smooth-surface caries of primary
teeth than were the caries-free children. Fifty-seven percent of the children with proximal lesions in primary
molars in the primary dentition developed additional
primary molar proximal lesions in the mixed dentition.
Children with faciolingual decay (nursing caries) were at
the highest risk of any group for developing additional
caries lesions. These investigators also discovered levels of

158

Chapter 9

n

Dental Caries in the Child and Adolescent

caries susceptibility in children that can be characterized
as caries-free, pit-and-fissure caries, and proximal molar
caries patterns.

CARIES PREVALENCE IN
SCHOOLCHILDREN
The report by Vargas and colleagues provides additional
representative data for schoolchildren as well.26 Their report revealed that 61% of the sample of children from 6
to 12 years of age had at least one decayed or filled primary tooth. Furthermore, in the sample of 4116 children
from 6 to 14 years of age, 40% had at least one decayed
or filled permanent tooth. Of the 1383 children from
15 to 18 years of age, 89.8% had at least one decayed or
filled permanent tooth. The ethnic and family income
distributions for children in these different age groups
were comparable with those outlined in detail for the
preschool children. This information, along with that in
many other published reports, clearly indicates that managing the disease of dental caries among children remains
a formidable task, despite the advances made in various
preventive programs.

RAMPANT DENTAL CARIES
The disease process referred to as rampant caries is, in
terms of human history, relatively new. Rampant caries
has been defined by Massler as a “suddenly appearing,
widespread, rapidly burrowing type of caries, resulting in
early involvement of the pulp and affecting those teeth
usually regarded as immune to ordinary decay.”28
There is no evidence that the mechanism of the decay process is different in rampant caries or that it occurs
only in teeth that are malformed or inferior in composition. On the contrary, rampant caries can occur suddenly
in teeth that were previously sound for many years. The
sudden onset of the disease suggests that an overwhelming imbalance of the oral environment has occurred, and
some factors in the caries process seem to accelerate it so
that it becomes uncontrollable; it is then referred to as
rampant caries.
When a patient has what is considered an excessive
amount of tooth decay, one must determine whether
that person actually has a high susceptibility and truly
rampant caries of sudden onset or whether the oral condition represents years of neglect and inadequate dental
care. Young teenagers seem to be particularly susceptible
to rampant caries, although it has been observed in both
children and adults of all ages (Fig. 9-2).
There is considerable evidence that emotional disturbances may be a causative factor in some cases of rampant
caries. Repressed emotions and fears, dissatisfaction with
achievement, rebellion against a home situation, a feeling
of inferiority, a traumatic school experience, and continuous general tension and anxiety have been observed in
children and adults with rampant dental caries. Because
adolescence is often considered to be a time of difficult
adjustment, the increased incidence of rampant caries in
this age group lends support to this theory. An emotional
disturbance may initiate an unusual craving for sweets

or the habit of snacking, which in turn might influence
the incidence of dental caries. On the other hand, a noticeable salivary deficiency is not an uncommon finding
in patients receiving radiation therapy to the head and
neck and may place patients at high risk for severe caries
development.

EARLY CHILDHOOD CARIES, SEVERE
EARLY CHILDHOOD CARIES, NURSING
CARIES, BABY BOTTLE TOOTH DECAY
The American Academy of Pediatric Dentistry (AAPD) defines early childhood caries (ECC) as the presence of one
or more decayed (noncavitated or cavitated), missing (as
a result of caries), or filled tooth surfaces in any primary
tooth in a child 71 months of age or younger. AAPD also
specifies that, in children younger than 3 years of age, any
sign of smooth-surface caries is indicative of severe early
childhood caries (S-ECC).29
Research shows that human breastfeeding in infants
has many advantages and has not been epidemiologically associated with caries in the absence of other factors
such as poor oral hygiene or a carbohydrate diet. Frequent nighttime bottle feeding with milk is associated
with, but not consistently implicated in, S-ECC. Breastfeeding more than seven times daily after 12 months of
age is associated with increased risk for ECC.30,31 Nighttime bottle feeding with juice, repeated use of a sippy or
no-spill cup, and frequent between-meal consumption
of sugar-containing snacks or drinks (e.g., juice, formula,
soda) will increase the risk of caries.32,33 The clinical appearance of the teeth in S-ECC in a child 2, 3, or 4 years
of age is typical and follows a definite pattern.34 There
is early carious involvement of the maxillary anterior
teeth, the maxillary and mandibular first primary molars, and sometimes the mandibular canines (Fig. 9-3).
The mandibular incisors are usually unaffected. A discussion with the parents often reveals an inappropriate feeding pattern: the child has been put to bed at afternoon
nap time and/or at night with a bottle holding milk or
a sugar-containing beverage. The child falls asleep, and
the liquid becomes pooled around the teeth (the lower
anterior teeth tend to be protected by the tongue). The
carbohydrate-containing liquid provides an excellent
culture medium for acidogenic microorganisms. Salivary
flow is also decreased during sleep, and clearance of the
liquid from the oral cavity is slowed.
AAPD endorses the policy statement of the American
Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) on breastfeeding and the
use of human milk.35 The AAP statement includes the
acknowledgment that “breast-feeding ensures the best
possible health as well as the best development and psychosocial outcomes for the infant.” However, both organizations discourage extended or excessive frequency of
feeding times (from the breast or bottle) and encourage
appropriate oral hygiene measures for infants and toddlers.
There is considerable scientific evidence from experiments in vitro and in animal models to suggest that some
dairy products such as bovine milk and cheese, as well as
human breast milk, are not cariogenic and may a
­ ctually

Chapter 9

A

n

Dental Caries in the Child and Adolescent

159

B

D
C

E
Figure 9-2 A, Early childhood caries (ECC). B, Occlusal ECC in mandible. C, Occlusal and interproximal ECC in maxilla (mirror

image). D, Rampant dental caries and evidence of dental neglect in a preschool child. E, Palatal caries on maxillary incisor
teeth.

be protective to tooth structure and promote remineralization under certain conditions. Similar experiments
show that many infant formulas, with refined food additives, do promote caries. There is much still to learn
about caries progression in both the more typical disease
and this rampant form. It is prudent to counsel parents
to practice good oral hygiene measures for the child and
to avoid inappropriate feeding habits that are associated
with S-ECC.30

ADDITIONAL FACTORS KNOWN
TO INFLUENCE DENTAL CARIES
SALIVA
Although saliva was identified in the etiology section earlier as part of the host component and thus a primary part
of the caries process, the role of saliva overall is unique.
Further discussion is warranted regarding its influence on

160

Chapter 9

n

Dental Caries in the Child and Adolescent

A

B

C

D

Figure 9-3 Radiographs illustrating early childhood caries. A, Maxillary incisors (interproximal). B, Mandibular incisors.
C, Deep caries in mandibular molar. D, Maxillary molar distally and on mandibular first molar.

several aspects of the caries process that may help produce favorable environments to combat the process. Any
patient with a salivary deficiency, from any cause, is at a
higher risk for caries activity.
It is generally accepted that the dental caries process is
controlled to a large extent by a natural protective mechanism inherent within the saliva. Many properties of saliva
have been investigated for their possible role in the caries process. Considerable importance has been placed on
the salivary pH; the acid-neutralizing power; and the calcium, fluoride, and phosphorus content. It has long been
suggested that, in addition to these properties, the rate
of flow and the viscosity of saliva may influence the development of caries. The normal salivary flow aids in the
solution of food debris on which microorganisms thrive.
In addition, the saliva manifests a variety of antibacterial
and other antiinfectious properties. All known characteristics of saliva seem somehow relevant to the process of
dental caries.21
Saliva is secreted by three paired masses of cells—the
submandibular, sublingual, and parotid glands. Small
accessory glands are also scattered over the oral mucous membranes. Each of these has its own duct. The
salivary glands are under the control of the autonomic

(­involuntary) nervous system, receiving fibers from both
its parasympathetic and sympathetic divisions. Stimulation of either the parasympathetic (chorda tympani) fibers or the sympathetic fibers to the submandibular or
sublingual gland causes a secretion of saliva. In most animals the secretion resulting from parasympathetic stimulation is profuse and watery. Sympathetic stimulation,
however, causes a scanty secretion of a thick, mucinous
juice. Stimulation of the parasympathetic fibers to the parotid gland causes a profuse, watery secretion, but stimulation of the sympathetic fibers causes no secretion.21

Salivary Deficiency
A reduction in the salivary flow may be temporary or
permanent. When the quantity is only moderately reduced,
the oral structures may appear normal. A pronounced
reduction or complete absence of saliva, however, results
in an acidic environment with rampant caries (Fig. 9-4).
In addition to the rapid destruction of the teeth, there
may be dryness and cracking of the lips, with fissuring at the corners of the mouth, burning and soreness
of the mucous membranes, crusting of the tongue and
palate, and sometimes paresthesia of the tongue or
mucous membrane.

Chapter 9

A

n

Dental Caries in the Child and Adolescent

161

or rampant caries. In contrast, patients with greater than
average salivary flow are usually relatively free from dental caries.36
If a patient has no known existing conditions that may
cause hyposalivation, and if the clinician notices a small
pool of saliva in the floor of the mouth during oral examination, it is not unreasonable to assume that the patient
has adequate salivary quantity and flow. Little information is available about salivary flow rates in children, but
Crossner reported that in children from 5 to 15 years of
age, the rate of mixed whole stimulated saliva increases
with age, and boys have consistently higher rates than
girls.37 Saliva substitutes, as well as fluoride and chlorhexidine rinses, are reported to enhance remineralization and
promote resistance to demineralization of tooth surfaces,
and may help prevent radiation-induced caries.36

Salivary Viscosity

B

It has long been suggested that the viscosity of saliva is
related to the rate of dental decay. Both thick, ropy saliva
and thin, watery saliva have been blamed for rampant
dental caries. Previous work has shown a statistically significant direct relationship between the viscosity of saliva
and the number of decayed, missing, and filled teeth.38
This relationship held true for all members of the observation group, regardless of age. Patients with thick, ropy
saliva invariably had poor oral hygiene. The teeth were
covered with stain or plaque, and the rate of dental caries
ranged from greater than average to rampant.
No evidence exists that viscosity changes with age
under normal conditions. This property of the saliva is
governed not only by the particular set of glands stimulated but also by the type of nervous stimulation and the
amount of mucin (glycoprotein) present. Some genetic
abnormalities affect the viscosity of saliva; most notably,
patients with cystic fibrosis often have thick, ropy saliva
and salivary dysfunction.

SOCIOECONOMIC STATUS

C
Figure 9-4 Progression of early childhood caries illustrated in

three different children. A, Restorable with resins. B, Restorable
with crown forms (possibly). C, Nonrestorable.
There are many reasons for a reduction in salivary flow.
Acquired salivary dysfunction may be the result of a psychological or emotional disturbance and, again, may be
either temporary or permanent. During the acute stages,
mumps may cause a temporary reduction in salivary flow.
Immune disorders, such as Sjögren syndrome, and genetic conditions, such as hypohidrotic ectodermal dysplasia,
often exhibit chronic xerostomia (dry mouth). Many oncology patients receive head and neck or total-body irradiation that also results in salivary gland dysfunction.
Patients with deficient salivary flow often have excessive

The Surgeon General’s report of 20103 indicated that one
in four American children is born into poverty.2 The report notes that children and adolescents living in poverty
suffer twice as much tooth decay as their more affluent
peers, and that their disease is more likely to go untreated. The report also mentioned that, although continuing
reductions of dental caries in permanent teeth have been
achieved, caries prevalence in primary teeth has stabilized or possibly increased in some population groups. A
Census Bureau report published in March 2003 showed
that the poverty rate for children in the United States
rose in 2002, whereas it dropped for people 65 years and
older.39 Nearly half of the 35 million people living in
poverty were children. These are alarming data, calling
attention to a huge unmet oral health care need in the
United States.
Following the report of the Surgeon General, Edelstein
pointed out that, paradoxically, children living in poverty
also have the highest rates of dental insurance coverage,
largely through the Medicaid program and the State Children’s Health Insurance Program.40 Yet Medicaid-­eligible
children who have cavities have twice the number of

162

Chapter 9

n

Dental Caries in the Child and Adolescent

caries-affected teeth and twice the number of visits for
pain relief but fewer total dental visits than do children
in families with higher incomes. He also noted that these
disparities continue into adolescence and young adulthood, albeit to a lesser degree. Because practitioners have
the opportunity to assess the oral health of poor children
individually, they will identify some patients at low risk
for dental caries. However, the available data confirm
that, from a demographic perspective, economically poor
children are at high risk for dental caries.

ANATOMIC CHARACTERISTICS OF THE TEETH
Certain teeth of many patients, particularly permanent
teeth, seem vulnerable to dental caries as they emerge,
and, in caries-active mouths, they may show evidence of
the attack almost coincident with their eruption into the
oral cavity. Because enamel calcification is incomplete at
the time of eruption of the teeth and an additional period
of about 2 years is required for the calcification process to
be completed by exposure to saliva, the teeth are especially susceptible to caries formation during the first 2 years
after eruption. Permanent molars often have incompletely coalesced pits and fissures with or without hypoplasia
that allows the dental plaque material to be retained at
the base of the defect, sometimes in contact with exposed
dentin. These defects or anatomic characteristics can readily be seen if the tooth is dried and the debris and plaque
removed. In addition to occlusal surfaces, lingual pits on
the maxillary permanent molars, buccal pits on the mandibular permanent molars, and lingual pits on the maxillary permanent lateral incisors are vulnerable areas in
which the process of dental caries may proceed rapidly.41

ARRANGEMENT OF THE TEETH IN THE ARCH
Crowded and irregular teeth are not readily cleansed during the natural masticatory process. It is likewise difficult
for the patient to clean the mouth properly with a toothbrush and floss if the teeth are crowded or overlapped.
This condition therefore may contribute to the problem
of dental caries.42

PRESENCE OF DENTAL APPLIANCES
AND RESTORATIONS
Space maintainers and orthodontic appliances often encourage the retention of food debris and plaque material
and have been shown to result in an increase in the bacterial population.42 Few patients keep their mouths meticulously clean, and even those who make an attempt may
be hampered by the presence of dental appliances that
retain plaque material between brushings. Rosenbloom
and Tinanoff evaluated the MS levels of patients before,
during, and after orthodontic treatment.43 MS levels were
significantly elevated during active treatment. When
samples were taken 6 to 15 weeks into the retention phase
of treatment, however, the microbial levels were found
to have decreased significantly to levels comparable with
those of untreated children.
Dentists have known for many years that the tooth
structure at the interface with restorative material is especially vulnerable to recurrent caries. Clinical studies
suggest that dentists and their patients should not expect

successful restorative treatment to reduce a patient’s risk
for future development of caries lesions. Tinanoff and colleagues found higher numbers of salivary MS in patients
after they received restorative treatment.44 Wright and
colleagues observed significant reductions in the numbers of MS and lactobacilli immediately after restoration;
however, MS returned to prerestoration levels in many of
the study participants.45 Gregory and colleagues observed
that postoperative counts of salivary streptococci essentially equaled the preoperative counts after all restorative
work had been completed in their patients.46 Effective
prevention programs are required to protect the patient
from additional caries and to better justify the investment
in restorative care.

HEREDITARY FACTORS
Although parents of children with excessive or rampant
caries tend to blame the condition on hereditary factors
or tendencies, and some scientific evidence (as reviewed
in Chapter 5) acknowledges certain genetic influences on
the caries process, most authors agree that genetic influences on dental caries are relatively minor in comparison
with the overall effect of environmental factors. The fact
that children acquire their dietary habits, oral hygiene
habits, and oral microflora from their parents makes
dental caries more an environmental than a hereditary
disease. Although several hereditary factors (see Chapter
5) may be influential in promoting or preventing dental
caries activity, available effective preventive therapies
along with proper dietary and plaque control measures
can override the hereditary factors that contribute to caries development.

EARLY DETECTION OF DISEASE ACTIVITY
Traditionally, dentists have relied upon a visual-tactileradiographic procedure for the detection of dental caries. This procedure involves the visual identification of
demineralized areas (typically white spots) or suspicious
pits or fissures and the use of the dental explorer to determine the presence of a loss of continuity or breaks in
the enamel and to assess the softness or resilience of the
enamel. Caries lesions located on interproximal tooth
surfaces have generally been detected with the use of bitewing radiographs. These procedures have been used routinely in virtually every dental office in the United States
for the past 50 years. Tactile probing with an explorer
is no longer used for caries detection in most European
countries, and this protocol has now been adopted by
many U.S. dental schools. The primary concerns that led
to the discontinuation of the probing procedure were as
follows: (1) the insertion of the explorer into the suspected lesion inevitably disrupts the surface layer covering
very early lesions, thereby eliminating the possibility for
remineralization of the decalcified area; (2) the probing
of lesions and suspected lesions results in the transport
of cariogenic bacteria from one area to another; and (3)
frank lesions requiring restoration are generally apparent
visually without the need for probing. The clinical caries detection procedures commonly used in Europe have
been described by several clinical investigators.47-52

Chapter 9

The reversal of the caries process depends on an intact
surface layer of the lesion. The use of the dental explorer
to routinely probe enamel is no longer recommended.
Caries lesions are detected visually on the basis of their
location (mineralization can occur only in areas where
dental plaque may accumulate regularly) and the presence of enamel opacities with or without staining. The
state of activity is determined by the visual appearance
of an opacity, the color of the area (i.e., presence of white
or tan stain), and the roughness of the enamel surface as
assessed by dragging of the explorer across the surface.
Again the only use of the dental explorer as a probe is to
remove plaque or debris from tooth surfaces.52
While this visual examination procedure for clinically detecting dental caries maintains the integrity of the
enamel surface over the demineralized area and the possibility for the remineralization of the area, there remain
some practical limitations to this caries detection procedure. The detection process requires the visual detection
of demineralized areas as so-called white spots. First, these
areas are relatively small, and tooth surfaces must be carefully air-dried during the visual examination. By the time
these areas can be detected visually as white spots, the demineralization will have progressed through at least one
third of the outer portion of the enamel.53 Mineralization of this magnitude requires longer time periods and a
greater number of treatments to remineralize completely.
Lesions detected on radiographs have generally progressed to the initial involvement of dentin. The increased
desire of dental professionals and patients for more conservative restorative procedures and the implementation
of measures to control and reverse the caries process led
to significant efforts to develop technologies for the early
detection of dental caries. Dental scientists have explored
other measures to assist with the detection of caries at an
earlier stage of the formation process, which resulted in the
development and evaluation of a variety of instruments.51

PREDICTION OF PATIENTS’ RISK FOR
FUTURE DISEASE (RISK ASSESSMENT)
In contemporary health care practices, caries-risk assessment and management are now recognized as an important component in providing appropriate dental care for
infants, children, and adolescents. AAPD supports that
appropriate oral health assessment should begin within 6
months of the eruption of the first tooth and certainly by
the first birthday. This assessment should continue as appropriate by the same dentist and dental team providing
the child with a Dental Home. With the very young infant, the caries risk focuses on the parents’ and caregiver’s
oral health habits. The habits of the parents and caregiver
greatly influence the oral health of the child. These caregivers are asked questions that help guide oral health education for the infant, including the following questions1:
  
1.	When did they last have dental care and treatment?
2.	What are their eating habits, including sugar, soda,
juice, and energy drink consumption?
3.	How often do they brush and floss their teeth?
  
The education and training required to achieve optimal oral health must be provided to the adults who care

n

Dental Caries in the Child and Adolescent

163

for the child. Only once the child has grown and will
have more input into his/her eating and toothbrushing
habits should the focus move to the child. With the older
child, especially with the adolescent, caries-risk assessment tools become more useful.
In 2003 when discussing caries risk and introducing
the “Cariogram,” Petersson repeated the complex nature
of dental caries and the difficulties in predicting the development of the disease in any one patient.54 Over the
years these difficulties have not decreased. There are several tools for predicting dental caries development. In
2012 Tellez conducted a systematic review of caries-risk
assessment tools and concluded, “There is an urgent need
to develop valid and reliable methods for caries risk assessment that are based on best evidence for prediction
and disease epidemiology management rather than opinions of experts.” In this review the four most commonly
used caries-risk assessment tools were reviewed (Cariogram, Caries Management by Risk Assessment [CAMBRA],
American Dental Association, and the American Academy
of Pediatric Dentistry) and were found to be of equal value. The Cariogram has been evaluated and found to be
more predictive in permanent teeth than with preschool
children.55
The “Cariogram” is a computer caries-risk program
that records several data points including past caries experience, diet, oral hygiene habits, fluoride exposures, and
analysis of saliva. The program then produces the results
as a colored graph. This was well described by Gonzalez
and Okunseri in 2010.56 The different colors are as follows: red for bacteria, dark blue for diet, light blue for susceptibility-related factors, and yellow for circum­stances;
green represents the chance of avoiding caries. This pictorial presentation with the associated personal plan may
be good for patients or parents, although students in this
study did not support the usefulness of the tool in the
academic setting. The Cariogram has been validated in
several clinical studies and has been demonstrated to be
successful in predicting caries risk. While assessment of
caries risk undoubtedly is benefiting from emerging science and technologies, AAPD believes that sufficient evidence exists to support the creation of a framework for
classifying caries risk in infants, children, and adolescents
based on a set of physical, environmental, and general
health factors. It has also been documented that the caries-risk tools commonly used for adults do not support
future risk for children.57-59 AAPD has published guidelines on caries-risk assessment and management and the
caries-risk assessment tool (CAT) (Tables 9-1 and 9-2).
Of course, accurate caries-risk assessments of patients
can guide clinicians and health care facilities toward
better allocation of their time and resources for their
high-risk patients. As our accuracy and efficiency in
identifying patients with active disease or high potential to develop disease improve, and as parents, patients,
and health care insurance plans accept this newer approach to care, the standard “6-month recall visit” for
children may change to a more customized plan for individual patients or groups of patients. Children who
are at low risk for caries and who do not have other
oral conditions that need frequent monitoring may not

164

Chapter 9

n

Dental Caries in the Child and Adolescent

Table 9-1
Caries-Risk Assessment Form for Children 6 Years Old or Younger
(FOR DENTAL PROVIDERS)
Factors

High Risk

Moderate Risk

Low Risk

Biological

Patient is of low socioeconomic status
Patient has >3 between meal sugar-containing snacks
or beverages per day
Patient has special health care needs
Patient is a recent immigrant

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Protective

Patient receives optimally-fluoridated drinking water
Patient brushes teeth daily with fluoridated toothpaste
Patient receives topical fluoride from health professional
Patient receives additional home measures (e.g., xylitol,
MI paste, antimicrobial)
Patient has dental home/regular dental care

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Clinical Findings

Patient has >1 interproximal lesions
Patient has active white spot lesions or enamel defects
Patient has low salivary flow
Patient has defective restorations
Patient is wearing an intraoral appliance

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Circling those conditions that apply to a specific patient helps the practitioner and patient/parent understand the factors that contribute to
or protect from caries. Risk assessment categorization of low, moderate, or high is based on preponderance of factors for the individual. However, clinical judgment may justify the use of one factor (e.g., ≥1 interproximal lesions, low salivary flow) in determining overall risk.
Overall assessment of the dental caries risk: High ❒ Moderate ❒ Low ❒
From Council on Clinical Affairs: Guideline on Caries-risk Assessment and Management for Infants, Children, and Adolescents, American Academy of Pediatric Dentistry, Reference Manual 36(6), 127-134, 2014.

require oral health care visits as often as those at high
risk (with or without active disease), whereas compliant
high-risk patients may, at times, require frequent visits
and multiple forms of caries control therapies in addition to their voluntary modification of caries-promoting
dietary and behavioral habits.

CONTROL OF DENTAL CARIES
Many practical measures for the control of dental caries are applicable to private practice. Most practitioners
have tried control measures with various degrees of success. One cannot emphasize too strongly, however, that
no single measure for the control of dental caries will be
entirely satisfactory. All possible preventive measures and
approaches must be considered in the hope of successfully controlling and preventing the caries process. None of
these preventive approaches can have any hope for success without the regular and full cooperation and commitment from the caregiver and patient, with home-care
vigilance.
Pediatric dentists who see patients on a referral basis
may hear a parent remark, “My child has so many cavities
that my dentist doesn’t know where to start.” Although
it is true that the problem may at first seem overwhelming, a systematic, understanding approach often results in

a gratifying response. Following a discussion of the oral
problems with the parents, an outline of procedures for
the control of active or rampant caries in the cooperative and communicative patient is explained. With this
approach and with patient cooperation, the problem can
usually be explained and brought under control. The successful management of active dental caries, however, depends on the parents’ or patient’s interest in maintaining
the patient’s teeth and their cooperation in a customized
and specific caries control program.

CONTROL OF ALL ACTIVE CARIES LESIONS
When rampant caries occurs, the first steps are to initiate treatment of all caries lesions to stop or at least slow
the progression of the disease and to identify the most
important causes of the existing condition. Next, or even
simultaneously, if possible, the practitioner begins working with the patient and/or parents to achieve the appropriate behavioral modifications required to prevent
recurrence. The problem may then be approached in a
systematic manner. Invariably, modifications in oral hygiene procedures and dietary habits are necessary. Often,
achieving patient compliance with the recommended
modifications is the greatest challenge of all.
If the initial restorative treatment is to be done in one
appointment with the patient under general anesthesia

Chapter 9

n

Dental Caries in the Child and Adolescent

165

Table 9-2
Example of a Caries Management Protocol for Children 6 Years Old or Younger
INTERVENTIONS
Risk Category

Diagnostics

Fluoride

•	Recall every six to •	Twice daily brushing with fluoridated
12 months
toothpasteμ
•	Radiographs every
12 to 24
months
Moderate risk: •	Recall every six
•	Twice daily brushpatient/parent
ing with fluoridated
months
engaged
toothpasteμ
•	Radiographs every
six to 12 months •	Fluoride supplementsδ
•	Professional topical
treatment every six
months
Moderate risk: •	Recall every six
•	Twice daily brushing
patient/parent
months
with toothpasteμ
not engaged •	Radiographs every •	Professional topical
six to 12 months
treatment every six
months
High risk:
•	Recall every three •	Brushing with 0.5 perpatient/parent
cent fluoride
months
engaged
•	Radiographs every •	Fluoride supplementsδ
six months
•	Professional topical
treatment every three
months
High risk:
•	Recall every three •	Brushing with 0.5 perpatient/parent
cent fluoride
months
not engaged •	Radiographs
•	Professional topical
every six months
treatment every three
months
Low risk:

Diet

Sealants

Restorative

No

Yes

•	Surveillanceχ

•	Counseling

Yes

•	Active surveillanceε
of incipient lesions
•	Restoration of cavitated or enlarging
lesions

•	Counseling,
with limited
expectations

Yes

•	Counseling
•	Xylitol

Yes

•	Active surveillanceε
of incipient lesions
•	Restoration of cavitated or enlarging
lesions
•	Active surveillanceε
of incipient lesions
•	Restoration of cavitated or enlarging
lesions

•	Counseling,
with limited
expectations
•	Xylitol

Yes

•	Restore incipient,
cavitated, or enlarging lesions

α, Salivary mutans streptococci bacterial levels; ϕ, interim therapeutic restoration; γ, parental supervision of a “pea-sized” amount of toothpaste; β, parental supervision of a “smear” amount of toothpaste; λ, indicated for teeth with deep fissure anatomy or developmental defects;
χ, periodic monitoring for signs of caries progression; δ, need to consider fluoride levels in drinking water; ε, careful monitoring of caries
progression and prevention program; μ, less concern about the quantity of toothpaste.
From Council on Clinical Affairs: Guideline on Caries-risk Assessment and Management for Infants, Children, and Adolescents, American Academy of Pediatric Dentistry, Reference Manual 36(6), 127-134, 2014.

or in one or two appointments with sedation, control of
the existing lesions will be definitive at that time. If the
restorative care is to be performed over several visits in
the outpatient setting, gross caries excavation as an initial approach in the control of rampant dental caries has
several advantages. The removal of the superficial caries
and the filling of the cavity with a glass-ionomer material
or zinc oxide–eugenol cement (IRM, Intermediate Restorative Material; LD Caulk Co., Milford, DE, USA) will at
least temporarily arrest the caries process and prevent its
rapid progression to the dental pulp. Gross caries removal
can usually be accomplished easily in one appointment.
If there are many extensive caries lesions, however, a second appointment may be necessary.
An alternative approach for some compliant children
(with compliant parents) old enough to rinse and expectorate, and for compliant adolescents, is to initiate intensive and multiple antimicrobial and topical fluoride

therapies in conjunction with the necessary behavioral
lifestyle modifications and then to proceed systematically
with restorations and other indicated therapies.

REDUCTION IN THE INTAKE OF FREELY
FERMENTABLE CARBOHYDRATES
Excellent studies have shown a relationship between diet
and dental caries. As a result of these studies, considerable
emphasis has been placed on this phase of the caries control program. There is also much evidence to confirm that
between-meal snacking and the frequency of eating and
drinking are related to dental caries incidence.
Gustafsson and colleagues conducted a well-controlled
study of dental caries, now considered a classic, and observed that a group of patients whose diet was high in
fat, low in carbohydrates, and practically free of sugar
had low caries activity.60 When refined sugar was added
to the diet in the form of a mealtime supplement, there

166

Chapter 9

n

Dental Caries in the Child and Adolescent

was still little or no caries activity. However, when caramels were given between meals, a statistically significant
increase in the number of new caries lesions occurred. It
was concluded from these studies that dental caries activity could be increased by the consumption of sugar if the
sugar was in a form easily retained on the tooth surface.
The more frequently this form of sugar was consumed between meals, the greater was the tendency for an increase
in dental caries.
Weiss and Trithart reported additional evidence for
the relationship between the incidence of dental caries
and between-meal eating habits.61 In a group of preschool
children it was found that most between-meal snacks
were of high sugar content or were high in adhesiveness.
The children who did not eat between meals had 3.3 decayed, extracted, or filled primary teeth (deft), whereas
those who ate four or more items between meals had a
deft value of 9.8.
As mentioned earlier, sweetened liquids provided to
young children in nursing bottles can have enormous cariogenic potential. Likewise, carbonated soft drinks, juices,
sweetened drinks, and energy drinks are popular with older
children and adolescents and are readily available. Frequent ingestion of these drinks is another form of snacking
that can promote and accelerate caries progression.
Investigations by Schachtele and Jensen62 and by Park
and colleagues63 have indicated that the acidity of plaque
located in interproximal areas, which generally have less
exposure to saliva, may remain below the critical pH for
periods in excess of 2 hours after carbohydrate ingestion.
Because foods containing sugars in solution and retentive
sugars are included in the dietary analysis, 20 minutes may
be considered the minimal time each exposure permits
acid concentrations to be available in the bacterial plaque.
The following can be used in explaining the dental
caries process to a parent or child:
Fermentable carbohydrate + Oral bacteria within plaque
→ Acid within plaque
Acid + Susceptible tooth → Tooth decay

REDUCTION OF DENTAL PLAQUE (AND
MICROORGANISMS) WITH GOOD ORAL
HYGIENE PROCEDURES
Chapter 14 discusses the importance of good oral hygiene in more detail, but it must be mentioned here as
a critically important component of any caries control
program. Berenie and colleagues studied the relationships
between frequency of toothbrushing, oral hygiene, gingival health, and caries in 384 children, from 9 to 13 years
of age, who resided in a fluoride-deficient western New
York community.64 Of the children studied, 37% brushed
their teeth once a day, 37% brushed twice a day, and 13%
brushed less than once a day. The remaining children in
the group, approximately 13%, brushed their teeth three
or more times each day. A trend toward decreased scores
for decayed, missing, or filled permanent teeth (DMFT)
and decayed, missing, or filled permanent tooth surfaces (DMFS) accompanied increased daily brushing. The

increased frequency of daily toothbrushing had its most
significant positive effect on the level of oral hygiene.
Beal and colleagues studied the caries incidence and
gingival health of children who were 11 to 12 years old at
the start of the study.65 The children’s dental cleanliness
was evaluated at yearly examinations for a 3-year period.
The children whose dental cleanliness was consistently
good had lower caries increments than those whose dental cleanliness was consistently bad. Horowitz and colleagues have demonstrated the benefits of a school-based
plaque removal program in a 3-year study of children in
grades 5 to 8.66 At the end of the study, the adjusted mean
DMFS scores were 13% lower in the supervised plaque removal group than in the control group. The difference
between groups was accounted for entirely by a 26% difference in affected mesial and distal surfaces, a figure that
approached statistical significance (p = 0.07). Similarly,
Tsamtsouris and colleagues demonstrated that supervised
toothbrushing with instruction produces significantly
and consistently lower plaque scores, even in preschool
children, than were achieved through a control test of
the same children when they were neither supervised nor
instructed.67 The investigators concluded that constant
reinforcement is necessary to maintain effective plaque
control in preschool children.
Wright and colleagues conducted a clinical study to
evaluate the effect of frequent interdental flossing on
the incidence of proximal dental caries.68 Schoolchildren from a fluoride-deficient area were studied after
clinical and radiographic examinations were performed.
Based on the observations of this study, the authors
concluded that frequent interdental flossing resulted in
a 50% reduction in the incidence of proximal caries in
primary teeth during a 20-month period. The longer the
period of interdental flossing, the greater the benefit;
however, there was little residual effect after flossing was
discontinued.

USE OF FLUORIDES AND TOPICAL
ANTIMICROBIAL AGENTS
Without doubt, the repeated use of fluorides is of critical importance for the control and prevention of dental
caries in both children and adults. Numerous controlled
clinical investigations have consistently demonstrated the
cariostatic properties of fluoride provided in a variety of
forms. As a topically applied therapeutic agent, fluoride is
effective in preventing future lesion development, in arresting or at least slowing the progression of active cavitated lesions, and in remineralizing active incipient lesions.
Topical fluoride also has some antimicrobial properties.69
Existing evidence indicates that the cariostatic activity of fluoride involves several different mechanisms.
The ingestion of fluoride results in its incorporation
into the dentin and enamel of unerupted teeth; this
makes the teeth more resistant to acid attack after eruption into the oral cavity. Although it is present in very
low concentrations, ingested fluoride is secreted into
saliva and is accumulated in plaque, where it decreases
microbial acid production and enhances the remineralization of the underlying enamel. Fluoride from saliva
is also topically incorporated into the enamel of newly

Chapter 9

erupted teeth, thereby enhancing enamel mineralization
(frequently called enamel maturation), which decreases
caries susceptibility. The exposure of the teeth to fluoride
through professional application of fluoride ­
varnishes,
gels, foams, and solutions, in addition to exposure from
dentifrices, engages almost all of the foregoing mechanisms except the pre-eruptive incorporation into enamel. Numerous studies have shown that the presence of
fluoride greatly enhances the rate of remineralization
of demineralized enamel and dentin. Moreover, tooth
structure remineralized in the presence of fluoride contains increased concentrations of fluorohydroxyapatite,
which makes the remineralized tissue more resistant to
future attack by acids than was the original structure. In
view of fluoride’s multiple mechanisms of action, it is not
surprising that treatment with fluoride through multiple
delivery systems has additive benefits. This supports the
recommendation that frequent exposure to fluoride is
beneficial for maximal caries prevention and control.

Communal Water Fluoridation
Research studies continue to support fluoridation of the
communal water supply as the most effective method of
reducing the dental caries problem in the general population.70 In 1998 Stookey noted that approximately half of
the population of the United States enjoys the benefits of
fluoridated community water supplies.71
Murray reviewed 113 studies conducted in 23 countries
to help clarify various reports on the benefits to primary
teeth of communal water fluoridation.72 A thorough review of the data clearly showed that water fluoridation
provides protection for primary teeth against dental caries but to a somewhat lesser degree for permanent teeth.
The caries reduction benefits to primary teeth ranged between 40% and 50%, whereas the range for permanent
teeth was between 50% and 60%.
Carmichael and colleagues73 and Rock and colleagues74
have reported data in separate studies comparing the
caries incidence in children living in two fluoridated
communities with that in children living in two nonfluoridated communities in England. The role of fluoridation
in reducing dental caries is obvious in both studies. The
study by Carmichael and colleagues also demonstrated
that children in lower social classes gain an even greater
caries-preventive benefit than children in higher social
classes. The reason is that, as a group, the children in the
lower social classes have a higher prevalence of proximal
caries lesions, and proximal tooth surfaces derive the
greatest benefit from fluoridation.
The protection afforded by the ingestion of fluoridated
water persists throughout the lifetime of the person. Several studies have shown that the continuous ingestion
of fluoridated water during adulthood decreases the
prevalence of dental caries by about the same magnitude
as that observed in children.75,76 In addition, Stamm and
Banting have reported a 56% decrease in the prevalence
of root-surface caries in adults who lived continuously in
a fluoridated community.77
The posteruptive benefits associated with the ingestion of fluoridated water have also been demonstrated.
The posteruptive ingestion of fluoridated water can result

n

Dental Caries in the Child and Adolescent

167

in decreases in caries prevalence up to 30%.78,79 Similarly,
Hardwick and colleagues have reported a 27% reduction
in caries prevalence after 4 years of ingestion of fluoridated water by teenagers who were 12 years of age when fluoridation was initiated.80 These observations are consistent
with the multiple mechanisms of the action of fluoride
cited earlier and support the significant contribution of
the exposure of the teeth to fluoride even in the very low
concentrations present in fluoridated drinking water.
Several studies concerning the reduced prevalence of
dental caries associated with the presence of fluoride in
communal water supplies have demonstrated appreciably lesser benefits, typically ranging between 18% and
30%.81-83 This decrease in attributable benefit is due to
the so-called halo effect associated with the preparation
of numerous foods and beverages in fluoridated communities and their consumption in nonfluoridated communities. Reports have attempted to quantify this halo effect
by measuring the fluoride intake of children residing in
communities that do not have a fluoridated communal
water supply and have shown that fluoride ingestion is
nearly 70% of that by residents of optimally fluoridated
communities.84,85 Thus it is not surprising that only modest differences in caries prevalence rates are noted between children residing in fluoridated and nonfluoridated
communities.
When fluoridation is discontinued in a community,
an increase in the dental caries incidence follows. Way
has reported that, after a 2-year lapse in drinking fluoridefree water in Galesburg, Illinois, children experienced
as much as a 38% increase in tooth decay.86 Lemke and
colleagues have reported that in Antigo, Wisconsin, a
city of 9600, tooth decay rose 92% among kindergarten
children, 183% among second graders, and 100% among
fourth graders when fluoridation was discontinued.87
Eichenbaum and colleagues reported interesting information related to the long-term impact of communal fluoridation on the private practice of pediatric dentistry.88
A survey conducted from 1948 to 1950 showed that 86%
of the pediatric patients in a private pediatric dental practice needed restorative treatment, and nearly half of these
children required pulp therapy. The results of this survey
encouraged the city health officials to implement dental
health education and preventive programs that included communal water fluoridation. A survey of the same
practice almost 30 years later (1977 to 1979) revealed a
dramatic change in the restorative needs of the children.
The majority of children needed no restorations, and the
number of teeth with pulp involvement was negligible.
In 1986 Smith estimated that the average annual cost
of fluoridating communal water supplies was approximately $0.25 per person.89 Gish pointed out in 1979 that
the annual cost varied with the size of the community,
ranging from approximately $1.50 per person in very
small communities to as low as $0.10 per person in larger
metropolitan areas.90 These estimates are still valid, with
only upward adjustment for inflation. Communal water
fluoridation remains by far the most cost-effective cariespreventive measure available.
In 2001 the Task Force on Community Preventive
Services of the CDC strongly recommended community

168

Chapter 9

n

Dental Caries in the Child and Adolescent

water fluoridation and school-based or school-linked pitand-fissure sealant delivery programs for the prevention
and control of dental caries.91

Fluoride-Containing Dentifrices
Extensive research initiated in the early 1950s ultimately
resulted in the identification of the first fluoride-containing
dentifrice (Crest; Procter & Gamble, Cincinnati, Ohio,
USA) capable of decreasing the incidence of dental caries. This dentifrice contained stannous fluoride (SnF2) in
combination with calcium pyrophosphate as the cleaning and polishing system; and in 1964, based on more
than 20 clinical trials, it was accepted by the Council on
Dental Therapeutics of the American Dental Association
(ADA) as the first therapeutic dentifrice. The significance
of this original development has been profound; in fact
a review by Jenkins concluded that the general decline
in caries prevalence in Great Britain and other developed
countries appears to be attributable in large part to the
widespread use of effective fluoride-containing denti­
frices.92 Meta-analyses of more than 70 randomized or
quasi-randomized controlled clinical trials have shown
that fluoride toothpaste is efficacious in reducing the
prevalence of dental caries in permanent teeth. The effect was increased in children with higher baseline levels
of caries who used a higher concentration of fluoride in
the toothpaste, had greater frequency of use, and brushed
under supervision.93
Caregivers should be counseled based on the child’s
age and caries-risk status.69 A smear of fluoridated toothpaste for children less than 2 years of age at increased
risk for dental caries may decrease risk of fluorosis. A
“pea-sized” amount of toothpaste is appropriate for
children aged two through 5 years (Fig. 9-5).94,95 A Cochrane review found that the effect of fluoride toothpaste increases with higher frequency of use. There were
statistically significant associations between estimates
of DMFS-prevented fractions and frequency of use, with
a 14% increase in preventive fractions (95% CI: 6% to
22%) with twice-daily brushing vs once-daily brushing.
Children should brush twice a day.96

Figure 9-5 Toothbrush with pea-sized amount of tooth-

paste.

Before 1981, attempts to identify a fluoride dentifrice system significantly more effective than the original stannous fluoride formulation were unsuccessful.
However, in 1981 the results of two clinical studies
demonstrated the superiority of a sodium fluoride composition.97,98 A 3-year clinical study was conducted by
Beiswanger and colleagues97 to determine the effect of a
sodium fluoride–silica abrasive dentifrice on dental caries. The dentifrice, containing 0.243% sodium fluoride,
was compared with stannous fluoride in a study group
of 1824 schoolchildren from 6 to 14 years of age in Indiana cities where water supplies were fluoride deficient
(containing less than 0.35 ppm fluoride). After 3 years
the group brushing with the sodium fluoride dentifrice
had significantly lower DMFT and DMFS increments
than did the group brushing with the stannous fluoride
dentifrice. Two independent examiners found that the
reductions were 14.8% and 10.5% for DMFT and 16.4%
and 13.1% for DMFS. These results are consistent with
those reported by Zacherl in which the sodium fluoride
dentifrice resulted in a 40.7% decrease in DMFS compared with a 23.4% decrease observed with the stannous
fluoride dentifrice.98 Similarly, studies conducted by
Gerdin99 and by Edlund and Koch100 indicated that the
use of sodium fluoride dentifrices by children resulted in
significantly less caries than the use of dentifrices containing sodium monofluorophosphate.

Topical Fluorides in the Dental Office
Fluoride-containing varnishes have been widely used in
Europe and other parts of the world for approximately
40 years but were not available in the United States until
1994. The first fluoride varnish was introduced in Europe
in 1964 and contained 5.0% sodium fluoride (or 2.26%
fluoride, equivalent to 22,600 ppm). A second product
was introduced in Europe in 1975 and contained 0.9%
silane fluoride (or 0.1% fluoride). Much more research has
been conducted on the sodium fluoride system, and it is
the most widely accepted.
Petersson,101 Horowitz and Ismail,102 and Petersson
and colleagues103 have reviewed the numerous controlled
clinical trials of fluoride varnishes and concluded that
these materials are equally as effective as professional
topical fluoride applications for the prevention of dental
caries in children. Seppä and colleagues investigated the
effect of the sodium fluoride varnish in children with previously high caries experience and found that this measure resulted in numerically fewer new caries lesions than
was achieved with semiannual applications of an acidulated phosphate fluoride (APF) gel during a 3-year study
period.104 These investigators also noted that the data for
use of this varnish satisfied the criteria of the ADA for the
claim of being “at least as good as” professionally applied
topical fluoride gels. Helfenstein and Steiner performed a
meta-analysis of the data from several clinical trials and
found that use of the sodium fluoride varnish resulted in
an overall reduction of 38% in caries of the permanent
teeth.105
The periodic professional topical application of more
concentrated fluoride solutions, gels, foams, or varnishes has been repeatedly demonstrated to result in

Chapter 9

a significant reduction in the incidence of dental caries in both children and adults, as well as in the arrest
of incipient lesions.106 As a result, professional topical
fluoride applications are recommended for all children
and adolescents at moderate to high caries risk. Even
in the absence of dental caries activity, topical fluoride
applications for children are recommended as a means
of raising the fluoride content of the enamel of newly
erupted teeth, thereby increasing the resistance of these
teeth to caries formation. Historically the periodic topical application of fluoride was first demonstrated in the
early 1940s to be effective for the prevention of dental
caries. Since that time, many hundreds of publications
have provided additional data to confirm the efficacy
of professionally applied topical fluoride treatments for
caries prevention.106
A 4-minute treatment time has been typically recommended for professionally applied topical fluoride solutions, gels, or foams. They are less effective than fl
­ uoride
varnish.106 Some manufacturers recommend only a
1-minute application. Most of the fluoride uptake in the
enamel occurs during the first minute after application.
However, measurable benefits do continue to accrue for
approximately 4 minutes if the topical preparation remains in contact with the teeth. Therefore the 4-minute
application is recommended whenever possible. If gel or
foam is applied with a tray technique, the trays should
be about one-third full for gel and one-half full for foam.
Usually both upper and lower trays are inserted at once
to complete the topical fluoride treatment in one 4-minute application. Some trays are supplied as a connected
double set. The patient sits in an upright position with
his/her head tipped slightly forward to allow excess saliva and fluoride to flow toward the lips. With a saliva
ejector inside the patient’s mouth, the tip is moved to
help control drooling and the swallowing of fluoride.
The dentist or appropriate office staff should supervise
the treatment and provide assistance as needed. Patients
requiring assistance also often need positive reinforcement during the procedure. Extra caution and special
application techniques are required when topical solutions, gels, or foams are placed in the mouths of children. For children 4 years of age and younger, trays may
be challenging to use.
The results of independent clinical trials have raised
serious questions about the need for dental prophylaxis
before the topical application of fluoride. Ripa and colleagues compared the caries incidence during a 3-year
period in children given semiannual topical applications of fluoride after different cleaning procedures.107
Before each fluoride treatment the children received
conventional prophylaxis with a nonfluoride prophylactic paste, performed supervised toothbrushing
and flossing, or rinsed their mouths with water. Caries
increments after 3 years were essentially identical in all
the treatment groups, indicating that the manner of
cleaning the teeth before the fluoride treatment may not
influence the cariostatic activity of the fluoride applications. Similarly designed clinical trials were conducted
by Houpt and colleagues,108 Katz and colleagues,109 and
Bijella,110 with results comparable with those observed

n

Dental Caries in the Child and Adolescent

169

by Ripa and colleagues.107,110 Collectively these studies
indicate that prophylaxis before a topical fluoride application may be an optional procedure with regard to
caries reduction.
Beginning with reports by Ekstrand and colleagues111
and LeCompte and Whitford,112 several investigators
have expressed concern regarding the amount of fluoride swallowed by children during a topical fluoride application. These reports indicated that, depending on the
manner of application, 15 to 31 mg of fluoride may be
swallowed during the treatment. Stookey and colleagues
explored the feasibility of permitting patients to rinse after a topical fluoride application as a means of reducing
fluoride ingestion.113 However, they observed that rinsing
with water significantly decreased fluoride deposition in
incipient caries lesions. The patient should be encouraged
not to eat, drink, or rinse for 30 minutes after the treatment, to maximize fluoride uptake in enamel.
The sodium fluoride varnish (Fig. 9-6) is particularly recommended for use in children because of its ease
of application and equal efficacy to APF systems.71 The
varnish is applied with a soft brush, with reapplications
recommended at 3- to 6-month intervals depending on
caries-risk assessment. A more intensive annual treatment regimen consisting of three applications within a
10-day period was investigated and was observed to be as
effective as applications every 4 months.114-116 Furthermore, single annual applications have been found to be
without clinical benefit. Because less than a milliliter of
varnish is used for a professional treatment in children,
the amount of fluoride that will ultimately be ingested
when the varnish is lost from the tooth surfaces is less
than 3 mg. Thus there are no practical concerns regarding safety, and this procedure is frequently recommended for use in children in place of the traditional topical
fluoride gel application.

Topical Fluorides for the General Anesthesia
Patient
The application of fluoride to the teeth of children receiving dental care under a general anesthetic, after the
placement of restorations, is certainly recommended.
Thorough prophylaxis should precede the placement of

Figure 9-6 Application of white fluoride varnish.

170

Chapter 9

n

Dental Caries in the Child and Adolescent

the rubber dam for a quadrant of restorations. The fluoride should be applied after the restorative work has been
completed.

toothpaste or gel compared with no treatment, placebo,
or a 0.125% to 0.145% fluoride toothpaste.106

Over-the-Counter Fluoride Mouthrinses and Gels

A review of the literature on the value of fluorides administered during pregnancy failed to disclose any valid evidence to support such use, even in nonfluoridated areas.
Participants in a symposium concerning the use of
prenatal fluorides agreed that transfer of fluoride does occur from the mother to the fetus through the placenta.121
A study by Katz and Muhler suggested that the effect of
fluoride on primary teeth is mainly topical, posteruption,
and postnatal.122,123 In a study to determine the effect of
waterborne fluoride on dental caries in primary teeth, investigators examined 890 children from 4 to 7 years of
age in one Indiana city having a communal water supply
with only 0.05 ppm fluoride and in three cities having a
supply with a concentration of 1 ppm fluoride. Children
living in the cities with 1 ppm fluoride in the water had
between 35% and 65% fewer dental caries lesions in their
primary teeth than those living in the fluoride-deficient
city. Comparisons of dental caries incidence in the primary teeth of children living in the same city and who
were exposed either prenatally or postnatally or exclusively postnatally showed no between-group differences.
The natural fluoride content of the water should first be
determined. Fluoride supplements should be prescribed
only for children who are at high risk of developing caries
and after all other sources of fluoride (toothpaste, fluoride
in water, infant formula, etc.) have been evaluated. When
the primary source of drinking water is deficient in fluoride and the child is at high risk for caries, careful consideration of systemic fluoride supplements (drops, lozenges,
beads) should be given before fluoride supplements are
prescribed. If the natural fluoride content is 0.4 ppm or
higher, supplements should not be administered.124 If the
fluoride content is below 0.4 ppm, the administration of
fluoride supplements should be considered only after a review of all other types of fluoride sources, and if the child
is at moderate to high risk for caries.124
Several studies have reported the caries-preventive
effects of adding fluoride to a variety of foods and beverages. Fluoride in countries outside the United States has
been used as a caries-preventive additive in salt, milk, and
even sugar.125 Numerous reports show that these products
can have measurable and favorable results when used as
intended. Such products are designed for use by specific
and targeted population groups.

The use of dilute oral fluoride rinses and gels as an additional dental caries control measure has become another
helpful adjunct. Children younger than 4 years of age may
not have full control over their swallowing reflexes; therefore caution should be exercised when these products are
recommended for home use for this age group. However,
some small children can expectorate rinses quite reliably
under proper supervision, or the parent can brush on the
gel and wipe away the excess.
Radike and colleagues observed schoolchildren who
rinsed their mouths once each school day for 2 school
years with a stannous fluoride mouthrinse containing
250 ppm fluoride (about 0.1% stannous fluoride).117
There was a significant reduction in dental caries at the
end of the first and second school years. Two independent examiners found caries reductions of 33% and 43%
in DMFS scores. The anticaries benefit from the stannous
fluoride mouthrinse was especially encouraging because
the children were already receiving the optimum benefit
of water fluoridation.
Extensive field research has been conducted on the
use of fluoride mouthrinses. Most studies incorporate
the use of a 0.2% sodium fluoride rinse once weekly or
a 0.05% sodium fluoride rinse once daily. As does the
work previously summarized, these other studies show
unquestionable caries-preventive benefits of the regular
use of self-administered fluoride rinses when properly
supervised. These benefits accrue to primary and permanent
teeth, and seem to be helpful both in fluoridated areas
and in areas with nonfluoridated water. The studies by
Heifetz118 and by Ripa and Leske119 are cited in the references listed at the end of this chapter as good examples of
clinical research with fluoride rinses. Studies supporting
the use of the dilute gels are not as numerous as those for
the rinses, but some gels have been approved.

Prescription Home-Use Fluoride Mouthrinses,
Toothpastes, and Gels
Additional at-home topical fluoride treatments involving
increased concentrations of fluoride should be considered
for children at high risk for caries. These may include overthe-counter or prescription-strength formulations.120 A
meta-analysis of permanent teeth indicated that there
is a statistically significant reduction in caries with the
use of prescription-strength fluoride mouthrinses (0.09%
fluoride, equivalent to 900 ppm) compared with placebo,
no treatment, or Oral Hygiene Instruction (OHI) and prophylaxis. By frequency of use, daily and weekly rinsing
showed statistically significant effects, while biweekly
rinsing showed no106 significant improvement.
The primary difference between gels and toothpastes
(0.5% fluoride, equivalent to 5000 ppm) is that pastes
contain a small amount of an abrasive component. Two
meta-analyses, one for primary teeth and another for permanent teeth, showed a statistically significant reduction
of dental caries with prescription-strength 0.5% fluoride

Dietary Fluoride Supplements

Combinations of Fluoride Therapies
There is considerable evidence to suggest that using combinations of therapeutic fluoride agents often produces
additive anticariogenic effects. The evidence also indicates
that the earlier fluoride therapy is initiated in children,
the more effective the caries control will be. However, one
must use caution in prescribing multiple therapies in children, to avoid excessive fluoride ingestion.

Fluorosis
Fluoride is the most effective caries-preventive agent
commercially available today. Except in a patient with

Chapter 9

n

Dental Caries in the Child and Adolescent

171

a fluoride allergy (very rare), it is considered completely safe when properly used. Fluorosis is associated with
cumulative fluoride intake during enamel development, with the severity dependent on the dose, duration, and timing of systemic fluoride ingestion.70 The
ingestion of high concentrations can lead to nausea,
vomiting, dental fluorosis (mottling), or, in extreme
cases, even death, especially in children. Sources of dietary fluoride may include drinking water from home,
day care, and school; beverages such as soda, juice,
and infant formula; prepared food; and toothpaste. Infant formulas, especially powdered formulas that have
been reconstituted with fluoridated water, have been associated with an increased risk of fluorosis.126 Extreme care
must be used to safeguard the agents from inappropriate
or inadvertent ingestion. It is imperative that the dental
profession have full awareness of the hazards accompanying its use and yet be prepared to use it to the patient’s
maximum advantage through careful consideration of
each patient’s individual situation.

DIAGNOSTIC TOOLS
Caries detection is entering a new era, with technologies
capable of both detecting lesions at an earlier stage of
development and quantifying the impact of noninvasive
professional fluoride treatments such as fluoride varnishes.
There are several different instruments available on the
market that may be able to assist with the early detection
of caries. Each of these instruments must be used in combination with a detailed clinical examination and review
of caries risk for each child. There is insufficient scientific evidence for diagnostic accuracy regarding fiberoptic
methods and quantitative light-induced fluorescence. The
electrical methods and laser fluorescence could be useful
adjuncts to visual-tactile and radiographic examinations,
especially on occlusal surfaces in permanent and primary
molars, but evidence is graded as limited. No conclusions
can be drawn regarding the cost-effectiveness of these
detection methods. Early identification will provide evidence to guide the dental professional in implementing
various measures for the reversal and control of these caries
lesions.127,128

INFRARED LASER FLUORESCENCE (DIAGNOdent)
DIAGNOdent is an instrument designed to facilitate the
detection and quantification of dental caries on occlusal
and smooth surfaces (Kaltenbach & Voigt GmbH & Co.,
Biberach/Riss, Germany) (Fig. 9-7). It uses a diode laser
light source and a fiberoptic cable that transmits the
light to a handheld probe with a fiberoptic eye in the
tip. The light is absorbed and induces infrared fluorescence by organic and inorganic material. The emitted
fluorescence is collected at the probe tip, transmitted
through ascending fibers, and processed and presented
on a display window as an integer between 0 and 99.
Increased fluorescence reflects potential caries-affected
tooth substance. The identity of the material responsible for the fluorescence is still under investigation, but
it appears to be bacterial metabolites, particularly the
porphyrins.128

Figure 9-7 Infrared laser fluorescence diagnostic machine.

Many in vitro studies and a few in vivo (clinical) studies of the performance of this instrument have been reported. The results of the various in vitro studies have
indicated that DIAGNOdent is capable of detecting relatively advanced caries lesions, and DIAGNOdent readings
show a very good correlation with histologic evidence of
caries, but not with the depths of the lesions in dentin.
However, the results of the in vitro studies have also indicated that the readings are influenced by several variables,
including the type of restoration present on the tooth,
degree of dehydration of the lesion, presence of dental
plaque, and presence of various types of stain in occlusal
fissures. An example of this is that readings would be very
high for resins and sealants, indicating caries where there
may be none.127,128
The results of clinical investigations have shown significant differences in readings between different DIAGNOdent instruments with regard to the extent of occlusal
caries, which raises questions regarding the selection of a
value of 20 or 25 to indicate the presence of caries. Instrument readings higher than 20 or 25 suggest the presence
of caries, and higher readings generally reflect more
extensive lesion progression, although there does not
appear to be a linear relationship between the readings
and the extent of the lesion. Prudent use of the instrument
could identify early lesions that should be considered for
preventive rather than restorative treatment.127,128

DIGITAL IMAGING FIBEROPTIC
TRANSILLUMINATION
Conventional clinical caries examinations routinely use
transillumination to identify lesions located on the interproximal surfaces of the anterior teeth. For at least
30 years a fiberoptic transillumination (FOTI) instrument
has been available for clinical use. It provides an intense
light beam that is transmitted through a fiberoptic cable
to a specially designed probe to permit the use of transillumination on the proximal surfaces of posterior teeth.

172

Chapter 9

n

Dental Caries in the Child and Adolescent

Repeated improvements have been made in the instrument so that it may be used on occlusal and proximal
tooth surfaces and the instrument is commonly used,
often in place of radiographs, in private practices in
Europe. Digital imaging fiber optic transillumination
(DIFOTI) (Electro-Optical Sciences, Inc., Irvington, New
York, USA) is a further advancement of this technology,
in which the visually observed images are captured with
the use of a digital charge-coupled device (CCD) camera and sent to a computer for analysis with dedicated
algorithms.

QUANTITATIVE LIGHT FLUORESCENCE
The most extensively investigated technique available for
the early detection of dental caries is quantitative light
fluorescence (QLF). Numerous additional in vitro and in
situ studies have confirmed this important correlation between the amount of observed fluorescence and the mineral content of the lesions, and have made it possible to
develop a system that could truly assess changes in either
the progression or regression of caries lesions.
The fluorescent filtered images are captured with a
color CCD camera. From these clinical studies, it is apparent that QLF enhances the early detection of dental caries
and is uniquely useful in monitoring the progression or
regression of lesions.
Numerous investigations have demonstrated the
practical usefulness of QLF for the early detection of
dental caries on occlusal and smooth tooth surfaces, and
for the quantification of lesion changes related to treatment procedures and environmental factors such as oral
hygiene. The only significant limitation to this instrument is its inability to detect or monitor interproximal
lesions.127,128

OTHER PREVENTIVE THERAPIES
CHLORHEXIDINE AND THYMOL
As an oral antimicrobial, chlorhexidine has been used in
oral rinses, dentifrices, chewing gum, varnish, and gel.
In the United States, it is used most often in the form
of a prescription oral rinse. Many children object to the
taste of these products, but they have been shown to be
effective against the microorganisms causing both caries
and periodontal disease. Additionally, most chlorhexidine mouthrinses contain a high concentration of alcohol; thymol has also been included with chlorhexidine
in some varnish preparations. To date, these products
have not shown superior caries-preventive results when
compared with multiple fluoride therapies, and they may
require more frequent application to be effective.

POVIDONE-IODINE
Considerable data exist from laboratory and animal studies to confirm the dramatic suppression of MS by iodine.
Several studies in humans have been conducted, but
there is insufficient evidence that the use of iodine lowers the incidence of caries. Short-term reductions of MS
have been noted, but long-term reductions have not been
­reported.131

XYLITOL
Xylitol is a sweetener that inhibits the growth of MS.
­Numerous studies seem to confirm its anticariogenic capability. Clinically effective levels of xylitol show MS strains
with reduced adhesion to the teeth and other reduced virulence properties, such as less acid production.129 Xylitol
has been tested as an additive to a variety of foods and to
dentifrices. However, the vast majority of published data
come from studies in which xylitol was incorporated into
chewing gum. Mäkinen has reported numerous studies
on the topic, most of them performed with many different co-workers in different parts of the world. In 2000
he published a concise summary entitled, “The Rocky
Road of Xylitol to Its Clinical Application.”130 A recent
evidence-based review concluded that there is insufficient evidence that the use of xylitol gum, chlorhexidine
varnish or gel, or calcium supplementation in mothers
lowers the incidence of caries in their children. Clinicians
may consider recommending xylitol use to moderate- or
high-caries-risk patients. Those recommending xylitol
should be familiar with the product labeling and recommend age-appropriate products. They should routinely
reassess a child for changes in caries-risk status and adjust
recommendations accordingly.129,131

CARIES VACCINE
A vaccine to prevent the disease of dental caries has been
an anticipated scientific breakthrough since at least the
early 1940s. Research efforts assume that MS is the principal etiologic organism of dental caries, and the development of a method of immunization specifically targeted
at neutralizing MS has been a major thrust of caries vaccine research. Bowen reported that monkeys remained
caries-free for more than 6 years after the animals received intraoral injections of killed MS, even though the
monkeys were fed highly cariogenic diets and had severe
malocclusion that would predispose them to caries.132
Most current research is being directed toward a greater
understanding of the immune system and specifically of
immune responses to MS. The route of administration of
the vaccine is usually mucosal absorption by intraoral or
intranasal tissues.

DENTAL CARIES ACTIVITY TESTS
For the larger part of a century, dental scientists have
been trying to develop a convenient method for quantitatively measuring the degree of dental caries activity
in individual patients. Techniques requiring laboratory
procedures to determine oral bacterial counts or their
aciduric potential have been developed and used. More
recently, convenient paper test strips to gauge salivary
microbial density in patients have been tested. No truly
convenient and efficient test method has yet been developed that has sufficient accuracy to be a reliable caries activity indicator. Research continues in this area, because
having an accurate, convenient, and efficient test to
measure early caries activity and its level of potential, especially in young children, would be a very useful diag­
nostic tool for private practitioners and public health
assistance providers.133

Chapter 9

DENTIST’S ROLE IN THE CARIES
CONTROL PROGRAM
The success of a dental caries control program depends to
a great extent on the interest and cooperation of the patient and the patient’s caregivers. Rampant caries should
not be viewed as a hopeless problem. Diagnostic, therapeutic, and preventive measures are available to control
it. In the clinical management of rampant caries, the dentist’s role consists of seeking and eliminating the cause
to the extent possible. This includes trying to correct inappropriate habits or deficiency states that may be contributing factors, restoring the salvageable teeth to good
form and function, and, finally, making use of all available therapeutic preventive and control measures in an
established, ongoing manner.
Successful management of all active dental caries problems also requires careful diagnosis, complete dental and
medical history-taking, the initiation of a comprehensive
preventive program, the application of sound principles
of restorative dentistry, and the establishment of a regular recall schedule for maintenance and reemphasis of the
preventive procedures. The recall appointment should be
set at each visit based on the clinician’s judgment of the
patient’s caries risk for future disease at that time.134

REFERENCES
1.	American Academy of Pediatric Dentistry: Definition of a
dental home, Pediatr Dent 35(6):12, 2014. [Special issue:
Reference manual 2013-2014].
2.	US Department of Health and Human Services: Oral health
in America: a report of the Surgeon General, Rockville, MD,
2000, US Department of Health and Human Services, National Institute of Dental and Craniofacial Research, National Institutes of Health.
3.	Benjamin RM: Surgeon General’s perspectives, Public Health
Rep 125:2010, 2010.
4.	Edelstein BL, Douglass CW: Dispelling the myth that 50
percent of U.S. schoolchildren have never had a cavity,
Public Health Rep 110:522–530, 1995.
5.	Ripa LW: Nursing caries: a comprehensive review, Pediatr
Dent 10:268–282, 1988.
6.	Newacheck PW, et al.: The unmet health needs of America’s
children, Pediatrics 105:989–997, 2000.
7.	Pew Charitable Trusts: In search of dental care, Public Health
Rep 1-15, 2013. Accessed at http://www.pewstates.org/up
loadedFiles/PCS_Assets/2013/In_search_of_dental_care.
pdf. March 25, 2014.
8.	Gift HC: Oral health outcomes research—challenges and
opportunities. In Slade GD, editor: Measuring oral health and
quality of life, Chapel Hill, NC, 1997, University of North
Carolina Department of Dental Ecology.
9.	Keyes P, Fitzgerald RJ: Dental caries in the Syrian hamster,
Arch Oral Biol 7:267–277, 1962.
10.	American Academy of Pediatric Dentistry Policy on Early
Childhood Caries (ECC): Classifications, consequences, and
preventive strategies, Pediatr Dent 35(6):47–49, 2014. [Special issue: Reference manual 2013-2014].
11.	Loesche WJ: Role of Streptococcus mutans in human dental
decay, Microbiol Rev 50:353–380, 1986.
12.	Wan AK, et al.: Association of Streptococcus mutans infection and oral developmental nodules in pre-dentate infants, J Dent Res 80:1945–1948, 2001.

n

Dental Caries in the Child and Adolescent

173

13.	Wan AK, et al.: Oral colonization of Streptococcus mutans in
six-month-old predentate infants, J Dent Res 80:2060–2065,
2001.
14.	Wan AK, et al.: A longitudinal study of Streptococcus mutans colonization in infants after tooth eruption, J Dent Res
82:504–508, 2003.
15.	Davey AL, Rogers AH: Multiple types of the bacterium
Streptococcus mutans in the human mouth and their intrafamily transmission, Arch Oral Biol 29:453–460, 1984.
16.	Berkowitz RJ, Jones P: Mouth-to-mouth transmission of
the bacterium Streptococcus mutans between mother and
child, Arch Oral Biol 30:377–379, 1985.
17.	Brown JP, Junner C, Liew V: A study of Streptococcus
mutans levels in both infants with bottle caries and their
mothers, Aust Dent J 30:96–98, 1985.
18.	Kohler B, Andreen I, Jonsson B: The effect of caries-preventive
measures in mothers on dental caries and the presence of the
bacteria Streptococcus mutans and lactobacilli in their
children, Arch Oral Biol 29:879–883, 1984.
19.	Caufield PW, Cutter GR, Dasanayake AP: Initial acquisition
of mutans streptococci by infants: evidence for a discrete
window of infectivity, J Dent Res 72:37–45, 1993.
20.	Mohan A, et al.: The relationship between bottle usage/content, age, and number of teeth with mutans streptococci
colonization in 6–24-month-old children, Community Dent
Oral Epidemiol 26:12–20, 1998.
21.	Nyvad B, Fejerskov O: Assessing the stage of caries lesion
activity on the basis of clinical and microbiological examination, Community Dent Oral Epidemiol 25:69–75, 1997.
22.	CDC: Recommendations for using fluoride to prevent and
control dental caries in the United States, MMWR Recomm
Rep 50(RR-14):1–42, 2001.
23.	Edelstein B, Tinanoff N: Screening preschool children for
dental caries using a microbial test, Pediatr Dent 11:129–132,
1989.
24.	Douglass JM, et al.: Dental caries experience in a Connecticut Head Start program in 1991 and 1999, Pediatr Dent
24:309–314, 2002.
25.	Tang JM, et al.: Dental caries prevalence and treatment
levels in Arizona preschool children, Public Health Rep
112:319–331, 1997.
26.	Vargas CM, Crall JJ, Schneider DA: Sociodemographic distribution of pediatric dental caries: NHANES III, 1988-1994,
J Am Dent Assoc 129:1229–1238, 1998.
27.	Greenwell AL, et al.: Longitudinal evaluation of caries patterns from the primary to the mixed dentition, Pediatr Dent
12:278–282, 1990.
28.	Massler JN: Teen-age caries, J Dent Child 12:57–64, 1945.
29.	American Academy of Pediatric Dentistry: Policy on early
childhood caries (ECC): unique challenges and treatment
options, Pediatr Dent 33(Suppl 6):50–51, 2014. [Special issue: Reference manual 2013-2014].
30.	
Iida H, et al.: Association between infant breastfeeding
and early childhood caries in the United States, Pediatrics
120(4):944–952, 2007.
31.	Mohebbi SZ, et al.: Feeding habits as determinants of
early childhood caries in a population where prolonged
breastfeeding is the norm, Community Dent Oral Epidemiol
36(4):363–369, 2008.
32.	Feldens CA, et al.: Early feeding practices and severe early
childhood caries in four-year-old children from southern Brazil: a birth cohort study, Caries Res 44(5):445–452,
2010.
33.	Tinanoff NT, Kanellis MJ, Vargas CM: Current understanding
of the epidemiology, mechanism, and prevention of dental
caries in preschool children, Pediatr Dent 24(6):543–551,
2002.

174

Chapter 9

n

Dental Caries in the Child and Adolescent

34.	American Academy of Pediatric Dentistry: Policy on early
childhood caries (ECC): classifications, consequences and
preventive strategies, Pediatr Dent 30(Suppl 7):40–43, 2008.
[Special issue: Reference manual 2008-2009].
35.	American Academy of Pediatric Dentistry: Policy on dietary
recommendations for infants, children, and adolescents,
Pediatr Dent 30(Suppl 7):L47–L48, 2008. [Special issue: Reference manual 2008-2009].
36.	Tinanoff NT: The oral cavity. In Kliegman RM, Stanton
BF, St Geme J, et al.: Nelson textbook of pediatrics, ed 19,
Philadelphia, 2011, Elsevier (Saunders), p 1257.
37.	Crossner CG: Salivary flow rate in children and adolescents,
Swed Dent J 8:271–276, 1984.
38.	McDonald RE: Human saliva: a study of the rate of flow and
viscosity and its relationship to dental caries [thesis], Indianapolis, 1951, Indiana University School of Dentistry.
39.	US Census Bureau: Poverty in the United States: 2002, Washington, DC, March 10, 2003, US Department of Commerce,
Economics and Statistics Administration, US Census Bureau.
40.	Edelstein BL: Disparities in oral health and access to
care: findings of national surveys, Ambul Pediatr 2(Suppl):141–147, 2002.
41.	Weerheijm KL: Molar incisor hypomineralisation (MIH),
Eur J Paediatr Dent 4(3):114–120, 2003.
42.	Hafez HS, et al.: Dental crowding as a caries risk factor: a
systematic review, Am J Orthod Dentofacial Orthop 142(4):
443–450, 2012.
43.	Rosenbloom RG, Tinanoff N: Salivary Streptococcus mutans levels in patients before, during and after orthodontic
treatment, Am J Orthod Dentofacial Orthop 100:35–37, 1991.
44.	Tinanoff N, Siegrist B, Lang NP: Safety and antibacterial
properties of controlled release SnF2, J Oral Rehabil 13:
73–81, 1986.
45.	Wright JT, et al.: Effect of conventional dental restorative
treatment on bacteria in saliva, Community Dent Oral Epidemiol 20:138–143, 1992.
46.	Gregory RL, El-Rahman AMA, Avery DR: Effect of restorative treatment on mutans streptococci and IgA antibodies,
Pediatr Dent 20:273–277, 1998.
47.	Pitts NB: Clinical diagnosis of dental caries. A European perspective, J Dent Educ 65:973–980, 2001.
48.	Pitts NB: Modern concepts of caries measurement, J Dent
Res 83:43–47, 2004.
49.	Pitts NB: Are we ready to move from operative to nonoperative/preventive treatment of dental caries in clinical
practice? Caries Res 38:294–304, 2004.
50.	Ekstrand KR: Improving clinical visual detection—potential
for caries clinical trials, J Dent Res 83(Spec Iss):C67–C71,
2004.
51.	Nyvad B, Machiulskiene V, Baelum V: The Nyvad criteria for assessment of caries lesion activity. In Stookey GK,
editor: Clinical Models Workshop: remin-demin, precavitation,
caries, Indianapolis, 2005, Proceedings of the 7th Indiana
Conference.
52.	Ekstrand K, Qvist V, Thylstrup A: Light microscope study of
the effect of probing in occlusal surfaces, Caries Res 21:
363–374, 1987.
53.	Pitts NB, Stamm J: International Consensus Workshop
on Caries Clinical Trials (ICW-CCT) final consensus statements: agreeing where the evidence leads, J Dent Res
83:125–128, 2004.
54.	Petersson GH: Assessing caries risk–using the Cariogram
model, Swed Dent J Suppl 158:1–65, 2003.
55.	Tellez M, et al.: Evidence on existing caries risk assessment
systems: are they predictive of future caries? Community
Dent Oral Epidemiol 41:67–78, 2013.

56.	Gonzalez CD, Okunseri C: Senior dental students’ experience with Cariogram in a pediatric dentistry clinic, J Dent
Educ 74(2):123–129, 2010.
57.	ADA Council on Scientific Affairs: Fluoride toothpaste use
for young children, JADA 145(2):190–191, 2014.
58.	Tellez M, et al.: Evidence on existing caries risk assessment
systems: are they predictive of future caries? Community
Dent Oral Epidemiol 41(1):67–78, 2013.
59.	Dean JA, et al.: Progression of interproximal caries in primary dentition, J Clin Pediatr Dent 22(1):59–62, 1997.
60.	Gustafsson BE, et al.: The Vipeholm dental caries studies:
the effect of different levels of carbohydrate intake on caries
activity in 436 individuals observed for five years (Sweden),
Acta Odontol Scand 11:232–364, 1954.
61.	Weiss RL, Trithart AH: Between-meal eating habits and
dental caries experience in preschool children, Am J Public
Health 50:1097–1104, 1960.
62.	Schachtele CG, Jensen ME: Comparison of methods for
monitoring changes in the pH of human dental plaque,
J Dent Res 61:1117–1125, 1982.
63.	Park KK, Ashmore RW, Stookey GK: Prolonged response period for indwelling plaque pH studies, J Dent Res 65(Spec
Iss):282, 1986 (abstract).
64.	Berenie J, Ripa LW, Leske G: The relationship of frequency of
toothbrushing, oral hygiene, gingival health, and caries experience in schoolchildren, J Public Health Dent 33:160–171,
1973.
65.	Beal JF, et al.: The relationship between dental cleanliness, dental caries incidence and gingival health, Br Dent
J 146:111–114, 1979.
66.	Horowitz AM, et al.: Effects of supervised daily plaque removal by children after 3 years, Community Dent Oral Epidemiol 8:171–176, 1980.
67.	Tsamtsouris A, White GE, Clark ER: The effect of instruction
and supervised toothbrushing on the reduction of dental
plaque in kindergarten children, J Dent Child 46:204–209,
1979.
68.	Wright GZ, Banting DW, Feasby WH: The Dorchester dental flossing study: final report, Clin Prev Dent 1(3):23–26,
1979.
69.	Wright JT, et al.: Fluoride toothpaste efficacy and safety in
children younger than 6 years: a systematic review, J Am
Dent Assoc 145(2):182–189, 2014.
70.	Centers for Disease Control and Prevention: Recommendations for using fluoride to prevent and control dental caries
in the United States, MMWR Recomm Rep 50(RR-14):1–42,
2001.
71.	Stookey GK: Caries prevention, J Dent Educ 62:803–811,
1998.
72.	Murray JJ: Efficacy of preventive agents for dental caries.
Systemic fluorides: water fluoridation, Caries Res 27(Suppl
1):2–8, 1993.
73.	Carmichael CL, et al.: The effect of fluoridation upon the
relationship between caries experience and social class in
5-year-old children in Newcastle and Northumberland, Br
Dent J 149:163–167, 1980.
74.	Rock WP, Gordon PH, Bradnock G: Dental caries experience in Birmingham and Wolverhampton schoolchildren
following the fluoridation of Birmingham water in 1964, Br
Dent J 150:61–66, 1981.
75.	Russell AL, Elvolve E: Domestic water and dental caries.
VIII. A study of the fluoride-dental caries relationship
in an adult population, Public Health Rep 66:1389–1401,
1951.
76.	Englander HR, Reuss RC, Kesel RG: Dental caries in adults
who consume fluoridated versus fluoride-deficient water,
J Am Dent Assoc 68:14–19, 1964.

Chapter 9

77.	Stamm JW, Banting DW: Adult root caries survey of two
similar communities with contrasting natural water fluoride level, J Am Dent Assoc 120:143–149, 1990.
78.	Arnold FA, et al.: Effect of fluoridated public water supplies on dental caries prevalence. Tenth year of the Grand
Rapids-Muskegon study, Bull Am Assoc Public Health Dent
17:32–38, 1957.
79.	Hayes RL, Littleton NW, White CL: Posteruptive effects
of fluoridation on first permanent molars of children in
Grand Rapids, Michigan, Am J Public Health 47:192–199,
1957.
80.	Hardwick JL, Teasdale J, Bloodworth G: Caries increments
over 4 years in children aged 12 at the start of water fluoridation, Br Dent J 153:217–222, 1982.
81.	Brunelle JA, Carlos JP: Recent trends in dental caries in U.S.
children and the effect of water fluoridation, J Dent Res
69:723–727, 1990.
82.	Clark DC, et al.: Effects of lifelong consumption of fluoridated water or use of fluoride supplements on dental caries experience, Community Dent Oral Epidemiol 23:20–24,
1995.
83.	Newbrun E: Effectiveness of water fluoridation, J Public
Health Dent 49:279–289, 1989.
84.	Jackson RD, et al.: Fluoride levels of biological samples collected from adolescents, J Dent Res 77(Spec Iss):143, 1998
(abstract).
85.	Jackson RD, et al.: The fluoride content of foods and beverages from negligibly and optimally fluoridated communities, Community Dent Oral Epidemiol 30:382–391, 2002.
86.	Way RM: The effect on dental caries of a change from a
naturally fluoridated to a fluoride-free communal water,
J Dent Child 31:151–157, 1964.
87.	Lemke CW, Doherty JM, Arra MC: Controlled fluoridation:
the dental effects of discontinuation in Antigo, Wisconsin,
J Am Dent Assoc 80:782–786, 1970.
88.	Eichenbaum IW, Dunn NA, Tinanoff N: Impact of fluoridation in a private pedodontic practice: thirty years later,
J Dent Child 48:211–214, 1981.
89.	Smith CE: Personal communication, 1986.
90.	Gish CW: The dollars and cents of prevention, J Indiana
Dent Assoc 58(2):12–14, 1979.
91.	Centers for Disease Control and Prevention: Promoting oral
health: interventions for preventing dental caries, oral and
pharyngeal cancers, and sports-related craniofacial injuries. A report on the recommendations of the task force on
community preventive services, MMWR Recomm Rep 50(RR21):1–13, 2001.
92.	Jenkins GN: Recent changes in dental caries, Br Med
J 291:1297–1298, 1985.
93.	Walsh T, et al.: Fluoride toothpastes of different concentrations for preventing dental caries in children and adolescents, Cochrane Database Syst Rev 1: CD007868, 2010.
94.	Scottish Intercollegiate Guideline Network: Dental interventions to prevent caries in children (#138)1–52, March 2014.
Available at http://www.sign.ac.uk/pdf/SIGN138.pdf.
Accessed March 25, 2014.
95.	Maternal Child Health Bureau Expert Panel: Topical fluoride recommendations for high-risk children, Washington, DC,
2007, Maternal Child Health Bureau. Available at http://
www.mchoralhealth.org/PDFs/TopicalFluorideRpt.pdf. Accessed March 25, 2014.
96.	Marinho VC, et al.: Fluoride toothpastes for preventing
dental caries in children and adolescents, Cochrane Database Syst Rev (1):CD002278 2003.
97.	Beiswanger BB, Gish CW, Mallatt ME: A three year study of
the effect of a sodium fluoride-silica abrasive dentifrice on
dental caries, Pharmacol Ther Dent 106:9–16, 1981.

n

Dental Caries in the Child and Adolescent

175

98.	Zacherl WA: A three-year clinical caries evaluation of a sodium fluoride-silica abrasive dentifrice, Pharmacol Ther Dent
6:1–7, 1981.
99.	Gerdin PO: Studies in dentifrices. VI. The inhibitory effect
of some grinding and non-grinding fluoride dentifrices on
dental caries, Swed Dent J 65:521–532, 1972.
100.	Edlund D, Koch G: Effect on caries of daily supervised
toothbrushing with sodium monofluorophosphate and sodium fluoride dentifrices, Scand J Dent Res 85:41–45, 1977.
101.	Petersson LG: Fluoride mouthrinses and fluoride varnishes,
Caries Res 27(Suppl 1):35–42, 1993.
102.	Horowitz HS, Ismail AI: Topical fluorides in caries prevention. In Fejerskov O, Ekstrand J, Burt BA, editors: Fluoride in
dentistry, ed 2, Copenhagen, 1996, Munksgaard.
103.	Petersson LG, et al.: Fluoride varnish for community based caries prevention in children, Geneva, 1997, World Health Organization. WHO/NCD/ORH/FV/97.1.
104.	Seppä L, et al.: Fluoride varnish versus acidulated phosphate
fluoride gel: a 3-year clinical trial, Caries Res 27:327–330,
1995.
105.	Helfenstein U, Steiner M: Fluoride varnishes (Duraphat):
a meta-analysis, Community Dent Oral Epidemiol 22:1–5,
1994.
106.	Weyant RJ, et al.: Topical fluoride for caries prevention:
executive summary of the updated clinical recommendations and supporting systematic review. American Dental
Association Council on Scientific Affairs Expert Panel on
Topical Fluoride Caries Preventive Agents, J Am Dent Assoc
144(11):1279–1291, 2013.
107.	Ripa LW, et al.: Effect of prior toothcleaning on bi-annual
professional acidulated phosphate fluoride topical fluoride gel-tray treatments: results after three years, Caries Res
18:457–464, 1984.
108.	Houpt M, Koenigsberg S, Shey Z: The effect of prior toothcleaning on the efficacy of topical fluoride treatment: twoyear results, Clin Prev Dent 5(4):8–10, 1983.
109.	Katz RV, et al.: Topical fluoride and prophylaxis: a 30-month
clinical trial, J Dent Res 63(Spec Iss):256, 1984 (abstract).
110.	Bijella MFTB, et al.: Comparison of dental prophylaxis and
toothbrushing prior to topical APF applications, Community
Dent Oral Epidemiol 13:208–211, 1985.
111.	Ekstrand J, et al.: Pharmacokinetics of fluoride gels in children and adults, Caries Res 15:213–220, 1981.
112.	LeCompte EJ, Whitford GM: Pharmacokinetics of fluoride
from APF gels and fluoride tablets in children, J Dent Res
61:469–472, 1982.
113.	Stookey GK, et al.: The effect of rinsing with water immediately after a professional fluoride gel application on fluoride
uptake in demineralized enamel: an in vivo study, Pediatr
Dent 8:153–157, 1986.
114.	Petersson LG, et al.: Caries-inhibiting effect of different
modes of Duraphat varnish reapplication: a three-year radiographic study, Caries Res 25:70–73, 1991.
115.	Petersson LG, Westerberg I: Intensive fluoride varnish program in Swedish adolescents: economic assessment of a
7-year follow-up study on proximal caries incidence, Caries
Res 28:59–63, 1994.
116.	Skold L, et al.: Four-year study of caries inhibition of intensive Duraphat application in 11–15-year-old children, Community Dent Oral Epidemiol 22:9–12, 1994.
117.	Radike AW, et al.: Clinical evaluation of stannous fluoride
as an anticaries mouth rinse, J Am Dent Assoc 86:404–408,
1973.
118.	Heifetz SB: Evaluation of the comparative effectiveness
of fluoride mouthrinsing, fluoride tablets, and both procedures in combination: interim findings after two years,
Pediatr Dent 9:121–125, 1987.

176

Chapter 9

n

Dental Caries in the Child and Adolescent

119.	Ripa LW, Leske G: Effect on the primary dentition of
mouthrinsing with a 0.2 percent neutral NaF solution: results from a demonstration program after four school years,
Pediatr Dent 3:311–315, 1981.
120.	
American Academy of Pediatric Dentistry: Guideline on
fluoride therapy, Pediatr Dent 33(Suppl 6):153–155, 2014.
[Special issue: Reference manual 2013-2014].
121.	Symposium: Perspectives on the use of prenatal fluorides,
J Dent Child 48:100–133, 1981.
122.	Katz S, Muhler JC: Prenatal and postnatal fluoride and dental caries experience in deciduous teeth, J Am Dent Assoc
76:305–311, 1968.
123.	Hennon DK, Stookey GK, Muhler JC: The clinical anticariogenic effectiveness of supplementary fluoride-vitamin
preparation: results at the end of three years, J Dent Child
33:3–12, 1966.
124.	Rozier RG, et al.: Evidence-based clinical recommendations
on the prescription of dietary fluoride supplements for caries prevention: a report of the American Dental Association Council on Scientific Affairs, J Am Dent Assoc 141(12):
1480–1489, 2010.
125.	Espelid I: Caries preventive effect of fluoride in milk, salt
and tablets: a literature review, Eur Arch Paediatr Dent
10(3):149–156, 2009.
126.	Hujoel PP, et al.: Infant formula and enamel fluorosis. A
systematic review, J Am Dent Assoc 140(7):841–854, 2009.

127.	Pereira AC, et al.: Validity of caries detection on occlusal
surfaces and treatment decisions based on results from multiple caries-detection methods, Eur J Oral Sci 117(1):51–57,
2009.
128.	Twetman S, et al.: Adjunct methods for caries detection:
a systematic review of literature, Acta Odontol Scand 71:
388–397, 2013.
129.	American Academy of Pediatric Dentistry: Guideline on xylitol use in caries prevention, Pediatr Dent 35(6):157–159,
2014. [Special issue: Reference manual 2013-2014].
130.	Mäkinen KK: The rocky road of xylitol to its clinical application, J Dent Res 79:1352–1355, 2000.
131.	Rethman MP, et al.: Nonfluoride caries-preventive agents:
executive summary of evidence-based clinical recommendations. American Dental Association Council on Scientific Affairs Expert Panel on Nonfluoride Caries-Preventive
Agents, J Am Dent Assoc 142(9):1065–1071, 2011.
132.	Bowen WH: Relevance of caries vaccine investigations in
rodents, primates, and humans: critical assessment, Immunology 11–20, 1976 (abstract; special suppl).
133.	Bader JD, Shugars DA, Bonito AJ: Systematic reviews of selected dental caries diagnostic and management methods,
J Dent Educ 65(10):960–968, 2001.
134.	
American Academy of Pediatric Dentistry: Guideline on
pediatric restorative dentistry, Pediatr Dent 35(6):205–211,
2014. [Special issue: Reference manual 2013-2014].

CHAPTER

10

Pit-and-Fissure Sealants and
Preventive Resin Restorations
s Brian J. Sanders

For additional resources, please visit the

website.

CHAPTER OUTLINE
CLINICAL TRIALS
RATIONALE FOR USE OF SEALANTS
SELECTION OF TEETH FOR SEALING
SEALANT TECHNIQUE
Cleaning
Isolation

I

Etching
Washing
Application of Sealant
Check of Occlusal
Interferences
Reevaluation

n 1955 Buonocore described the technique of acidetching as a simple method of increasing the adhesion
of self-curing methyl methacrylate resin materials to
dental enamel.1 He used 85% phosphoric acid to etch
enamel for 30 seconds. This produces a roughened surface
at the microscopic level, which allows for the mechanical
bonding of low-viscosity resin materials.
The first materials used experimentally as sealants were
based on cyanoacrylates but were not marketed. By 1965
Bowen had developed the bis-GMA resin, which is the
chemical reaction product of bisphenol A and glycidyl
methacrylate.2 This is the base resin used in most of the
current commercial sealants. Urethane dimethacrylate
and other dimethacrylates are alternative resins used in
sealant materials.
For chemically cured sealants, a tertiary amine (activator) in one component is mixed with another component
containing benzoyl peroxide, and their reaction produces
free radicals, which initiate polymerization of the sealant
material.
The other sealant materials are activated by an external energy source. The early light-activated sealants were
polymerized by the action of ultraviolet rays (which are
no longer used) on benzoin methyl ether or higher-alkyl
benzoin ethers to activate the peroxide curing system. The
visible light–curing sealants have diketones and aromatic
ketones, which are sensitive to visible light in the wavelength region of 470 nm (blue region). Some sealants contain filler, usually silicon dioxide microfill or even quartz.
Sealant materials may be transparent or opaque.
Opaque materials are available in tooth color or white.
Transparent sealants are clear, pink, or amber. The clear
and tooth-colored sealants are aesthetic but are difficult
to detect at recall examinations. Advances in sealant technology include light-activated coloring agents that allow
for color change during and/or after polymerization.
These compositional changes do not affect the sealant
but offer the benefit in the recognition of sealed surfaces.

PREVENTIVE RESIN RESTORATION
(SEALED COMPOSITE RESIN
RESTORATION)

The cariostatic properties of sealants are attributed to
the physical obstruction of pits and grooves. This prevents colonization of pits and fissures with new bacteria
and also prevents fermentable carbohydrates from reaching any bacteria remaining in the pits and fissures, so that
the remaining bacteria cannot produce acid in cariogenic
concentrations.

CLINICAL TRIALS
Many clinical studies have reported the success of pitand-fissure sealants with respect to caries reduction. As
the longevity of the sealant increases, the retention rate
becomes a determinant of its effectiveness as a cariespreventive measure.
In 1983 a National Institutes of Health Consensus Panel considered the available information on pit-and-fissure
sealants and concluded that “the placement of sealants is
a highly effective means of preventing pit and fissure caries. […] Expanding the use of sealants would substantially
reduce the occurrence of dental caries in the population
beyond that already achieved by fluorides and other preventive resources.”3
In 1991 Simonsen reported on a random sample of
participants in a sealant study recalled after 15 years.4
He reported that in the group with sealants, 69% of the
surfaces were sound 15 years after a single sealant application, whereas 31% were carious or restored. In the
group without sealants, matched by age, gender, and
residence, 17% of the surfaces were sound, whereas
83% were carious or restored. He also estimated that a
pit-and-fissure surface on a permanent first molar is 7.5
times more likely to be carious or restored after 15 years
if it is not sealed with a single application of pit-andfissure sealant.
The use of glass ionomer as a sealant material has the
advantage of continuous fluoride release; in addition, it
is hydrophilic and its preventive effect may continue
177

178

Chapter 10

n

Pit-and-Fissure Sealants and Preventive Resin Restorations

with the visible loss of the material. Glass ionomer
may be useful as a sealant material in deeply fissured
primary molars that are difficult to isolate due to the
child’s precooperative behavior and in partially erupted
permanent molars that the clinician believes are at risk
for developing decay. Antonson and colleagues concluded that glass-ionomer sealants had greater success
in the sealing of partially erupted teeth and combating
potential salivary contamination.5 In such cases, glassionomer materials must be considered a provisional
sealant to be reevaluated and probably replaced with
resin-based sealants when better isolation is possible.
Further long-term research is necessary before such
mate­
rials are recommended as routine pit-and-fissure
sealant materials.
A systematic review of evidence regarding the effectiveness of sealants in stabilizing or reducing bacterial
levels in carious lesions found that sealants were effective
in reducing total bacteria, and this number continued to
decrease with the time of sealant placement. The findings
of these investigators continue to support the notion that
a retained sealant can deprive bacteria of access to nutrients and therefore can be effective in reducing caries
progression.6-8
Wendt and Koch annually followed 758 sealed occlusal surfaces in first permanent molars for 1 to 10 years.9
At the end of their study, evaluation of the surfaces that
had been sealed 10 years previously revealed that only 6%
showed caries or restorations. Romcke and associates annually monitored 8340 sealants placed on high-risk (for
caries) first permanent molars during a 10-year period.10
Maintenance resealing was performed as indicated during the annual evaluations. One year after the sealants
were placed, 6% required resealing; thereafter, 2% to 4%
required resealing annually. After 8 to 10 years 85% of the
sealed surfaces remained caries-free.
Retrospective studies based on billing data from large
third-party databases reveal that sealant use is still surprisingly low, even in populations for whom sealants are a
covered benefit.11,12 In addition, these studies show that
the effectiveness of sealants in preventing the need for
future restorative care on the sealed surfaces declines after
the first 3 years following sealant treatment. These data
argue again for the importance of vigilant recall and upkeep of sealants after placement.
Another concern is the placement of sealants immediately after topical fluoride application. Clinical and
in vitro studies have shown that topical fluoride does
not interfere with the bonding between the sealant and
enamel.13,14

RATIONALE FOR USE OF SEALANTS
In 2008 the report on “Evidence Based Clinical Recommendations for the Use of Pit and Fissure Sealants” by
the American Dental Association’s Council on Scientific
Affairs concluded that sealants are effective in caries prevention and can prevent the progression of early noncavitated caries lesions.15
The American Academy of Pediatric Dentistry’s Pediatric
Restorative Dentistry Consensus Conference16 confirmed

support for sealant use and published these recommendations:
  
1.	Bonded resin sealants, placed by appropriately
trained dental personnel, are safe, effective, and
underused in preventing pit-and-fissure caries on
at-risk surfaces. Effectiveness is increased with good
technique and appropriate follow-up and resealing
as necessary.
2.	Sealant benefit is increased by placement on surfaces
judged to be at high risk for, or surfaces that already
exhibit, incipient caries lesions. Placing sealant
over minimal-enamel caries has been shown to be
effective at inhibiting lesion progression. As with
all dental treatment, appropriate follow-up care is
recommended.
3.	The best evaluation of risk is made by an experienced
clinician using indicators of tooth morphology,
clinical diagnostics, past caries history, past fluoride
history, and present oral hygiene.
4.	Caries risk, and therefore potential sealant benefit,
may exist in any tooth with a pit or fissure, at any
age, including primary teeth of children and permanent teeth of children and adults.
5.	Sealant placement methods should include careful
cleaning of the pits and fissures without removal of
any appreciable enamel. Some circumstances may
indicate use of a minimal-enameloplasty technique.
6.	Placement of a low-viscosity, hydrophilic materialbonding layer as part of or under the actual sealant
has been shown to enhance its long-term retention
and effectiveness.
7.	Glass-ionomer materials have been shown to be ineffective as pit-and-fissure sealants but can be used as
transitional sealants.
8.	The profession must be alert to new preventive
methods effective against pit-and-fissure caries.
These may include changes in dental materials or
technology.

SELECTION OF TEETH FOR SEALING
To gain the greatest benefit, the clinician should determine the caries risk; thus the term risk-based sealant treatment has come into use. In risk-based sealant treatment,
the practitioner takes into account prior caries experience, fluoride history, oral hygiene, and fissure anatomy
in determining when sealant should be applied.
Good professional judgment should be used in the selection of teeth and patients. The use of pit-and-fissure
sealants is contraindicated when rampant caries or interproximal lesions are present. Occlusal surfaces that are
already carious with involvement of the dentin require
restoration.
All caries-susceptible surfaces should be carefully evaluated, because caries is unlikely in well-coalesced pits and
fissures. In this case sealants might be unnecessary or, at
least, not cost-effective. Finally, although sealant application is relatively simple, the meticulous technique requires patient cooperation and should be postponed for
uncooperative patients until the procedures can be properly executed.

Chapter 10

While the cost-effectiveness of sealing permanent
teeth is well established, it has not been well studied
for primary teeth. Chi and colleagues attempted to address this question by analyzing the cost-effectiveness
comparing two primary molar sealing strategies, always
seal or never seal, with the standard care for Medicaidenrolled children.17 Using Iowa Medicaid claims data,
they found that:
  
1.	Primary molar sealants prevent dental disease.
2.	Primary molar sealants lead to higher costs, although
sealants for children at increased risk for tooth decay
would be one cost-reducing strategy.
3.	Compared with standard care, the incremental cost
and treatment avoided for always sealing primary molars are less than the incremental cost and treatment
avoided for never sealing primary molars.

SEALANT TECHNIQUE
After selection the tooth is washed and dried, and the
deep pits and fissures are reevaluated (Fig. 10-1, A). If caries is present, restoration or a combination of restoration
and sealing may be indicated (see later).
Marking centric stops with articulating paper provides information so that excess sealant does not interfere with occlusion. This is not necessary when the tooth
has just erupted but is helpful in a well-established occlusion.

CLEANING
Adequate retention of the sealant requires that the pits
and fissures be clean and free of excess moisture (see Figs.
10-1, B and 10-1, C). Acid-etching completely removes
the enamel pellicle, and a dental prophylaxis (even with
a dental explorer) does not increase the retention of sealants. From a practical standpoint, in cases of poor oral
hygiene, fissure cleansing with a rotating dry bristle brush
may be beneficial.
Pope and colleagues found, in a laboratory study, that
the use of a quarter round bur produced the greatest penetration of the sealant into the etched enamel.18 The use
of an aluminum oxide air abrasion system enables sealant penetration greater than that achievable by the use
of pumice or a dry bristle brush alone. It is not known
if the increased depth of sealant penetration will result
in greater sealant retention. When pumice or aluminum
oxide is used, particulate matter is left in the deep recesses of the pits, the impact of which has not been determined.
Hatibovic-Kofman and colleagues measured the microleakage of sealants placed in three groups of extracted
teeth.19 The teeth received conventional (etch), quarter
round bur, or air abrasion surface preparation. Teeth prepared with the bur exhibited the least microleakage. The
amount of microleakage in the conventional and air abrasion groups was about equal.
The routine procedure of fissure eradication is probably not necessary. In fact, inappropriate or aggressive use
of fissure opening or enameloplasty often removes the
last of the enamel overlying the dentin at the bottoms of
fissures, which leaves the tooth more susceptible to future

n

Pit-and-Fissure Sealants and Preventive Resin Restorations

179

caries in case of sealant loss. Good sealant methodology
and proper sealant volume are probably more beneficial
than enameloplasty.

ISOLATION
The tooth (or quadrant of teeth) to be sealed is first isolated. Rubber dam isolation is ideal but may not be feasible
in certain circumstances. Cotton rolls, absorbent shields,
and high-volume evacuation with compressed air may
also be used effectively.
Eidelman and associates reported comparable retention results with the use of a rubber dam and cotton rolls
for the isolation of teeth to be sealed.20

ETCHING
Microporosities in the enamel surface are created by the
acid-etching technique. This facilitates the application of
a low-viscosity resin that penetrates the roughened surface and produces a mechanical lock of resin tags when
cured.
Various phosphoric acid solutions have been evaluated for the etching procedure. Zidan and Hill tested the
amount of surface loss of the enamel after 60 seconds of
etching with different phosphoric acid concentrations
ranging from 0.5% to 80%.21 They reported that the
maximum loss of the enamel was produced by the 35%
concentrations, whereas the bond strengths were not significantly different after being etched with 2%, 5%, and
35% concentrations. Generally, from 30% to 50% acid solutions or gels are recommended.
The etchant in solution should be placed on the
enamel with a brush, small sponge, cotton pellet, or
applicator provided by the manufacturer. The etchant
should be placed widely across the surface to be sealed,
so that there is no chance that resin placement and polymerization will occur over an unetched enamel area. If
a solution is used, one should gently agitate and replenish it, making an effort to avoid rubbing and breaking
the enamel rods.
Occasionally a viscous gel etchant may show a “skipping” effect, which occurs when the etchant does not
completely and uniformly wet the entire enamel surface,
and unetched areas are evident after washing and drying.
If this occurs, reetching is necessary.
Generally a 20-second etching time is recommended.
Enamel rich with fluorhydroxyapatite may be resistant to
etching and may need to be exposed for longer periods.
Primary teeth may also sometimes be resistant to etching and may require a longer etching time. Redford and
colleagues reported no increase in bond strength with
120-second etching on primary teeth compared with 15-,
30-, and 60-second etching times.22 Their in vitro study
showed that the etch depth increased between 60 and
120 seconds, but there was no corresponding increase in
bond strength.
Some advocate preparing the enamel for sealant application with an aluminum oxide air abrasion system or a
laser system approved for hard-tissue procedures. To date,
studies indicate that additional acid-etching is needed after each of these techniques to allow for adequate resin
bonding to the enamel.

180

Chapter 10

n

Pit-and-Fissure Sealants and Preventive Resin Restorations

A

B

C

D

E

F

G

H

Figure 10-1 A, An occlusal view of a molar with susceptible pits and fissures. B, The tooth is cleaned with a rotary brush.

C, The tooth is etched. D, The tooth appears frosty after being etched, washed, and dried. E, The bonding agent is placed on
the tooth. F, The sealant is applied to the tooth. G, The sealant is checked for polymerization voids and excess. H, The occlusion
is adjusted as necessary.

Chapter 10

WASHING
Most manufacturers’ instructions advocate a thorough
washing and drying of the etched tooth surface but do
not specify a time interval. Phillips advocated a 40-second
washing time,23 and Norling advocated 20 seconds.24
The etched enamel is dried with a compressed air
stream that is free of oil contaminants. The dry etched
enamel should exhibit a characteristic frosty appearance
(see Fig. 10-1, D).
Feigal and colleagues found that the use of a dentinbonding agent increased sealant retention in teeth even
when salivary contamination occurred.25 Choi and colleagues have reported corresponding findings in vitro on
moisture-contaminated bovine enamel.26 In a later extensive review article, Feigal recommended routine placement of bonding agents before all sealant applications.27
Although the recommendation is still to avoid moisture contamination whenever possible during sealant application, the use of a dentin-bonding agent as part of
the technique appears to be warranted (see Fig. 10-1, E).
Furthermore, the use of a dentin-bonding agent is definitely recommended in clinical situations that do not
lend themselves to strict isolation—for example, when
newly erupted teeth are sealed or when patient cooperation is not ideal. The use of a dentin-bonding agent is also
advantageous on the buccal surfaces of molars, which traditionally have shown a lower retention rate than the occlusal surfaces of teeth.28 When used, the bonding agent
must be thoroughly air-dried across the surface to be
sealed to avoid a thick layer of adhesive residue.

APPLICATION OF SEALANT
Chemically Cured Sealant
The manufacturer’s instructions should be followed. Precise mixing without vigorous agitation can help prevent
the formation of air bubbles.
The addition of the catalyst to the base immediately
begins the polymerization of the material, and this should
be kept in mind so that no time is lost in carrying the
material to the etched and dried tooth. Working time is
limited with a chemically cured sealant.

Visible Light–Cured Sealant
The curing of a light-polymerized sealant is not completed without the exposure of the material to the curing
light, but the operating light and ambient light can also
affect the material over a period of time, and so material
should be dispensed only when it is time to place it on the
tooth. The working time is longer than with chemically
cured sealant. The method of placement varies with the
different applicators provided by the manufacturers. The
sealant is applied to the prepared surface in moderation
and then gently teased with a brush or probe into the pits
and grooves (see Figs. 10-1, F and 10-1, G). With careful
application, incorporation of air bubbles is avoided. Care
should also be taken to avoid applying large amounts of
the sealant material.
If a light-curing material is used, the intensity of the
light should be considered. If a large surface area requires
polymerization, place the light directly over each area of
the occlusal surface for the recommended time.

n

Pit-and-Fissure Sealants and Preventive Resin Restorations

181

With light-cured sealants there is less chance for the
incorporation of air bubbles, because no mixing of materials is required. After the material has been cured and
while the treated teeth are still isolated, the unpolymerized surface layer should be removed by washing and drying, to avoid an unpleasant taste.

CHECK OF OCCLUSAL INTERFERENCES
Articulating paper should be used to check for occlusal interferences, and the occlusion be adjusted if necessary (see
Fig. 10-1, H). All centric stops should be on the enamel.
If a filled sealant has been used, it is essential to adjust
the occlusion before the patient is dismissed.
Other excess sealant that may have flowed over the
marginal ridge or toward the cervical area should also
be removed. If the tooth is isolated with a rubber dam,
the excess should be removed before the rubber dam is
detached. A small round bur at slow speed will remove
the excess effectively. If etchant has been well localized,
excess sealant may be removed with a sharp instrument
from the unetched tooth enamel without removing sealant from the etched groove areas.

REEVALUATION
It is important to recognize that sealed teeth should be
observed clinically at periodic recall visits so that the effectiveness of the sealant can be determined. Periodic recall and reapplication of sealants are necessary, because it
is estimated that between 5% and 10% of sealants need
to be repaired or replaced yearly. If a sealant is partially
or completely lost, any discolored or defective old sealant should be removed and the tooth reevaluated. A new
sealant can be applied using the method previously
described.

PREVENTIVE RESIN RESTORATION
(SEALED COMPOSITE RESIN
RESTORATION)
The preventive resin restoration is an alternative procedure for restoring young permanent teeth that require
only minimal tooth preparation for caries removal but
also have adjacent susceptible fissures.
Simonsen and Stallard described the technique of removing only the carious tooth structure in small class I
cavities.29 A resin restoration was then placed, and the
adjacent pits and fissures were sealed at the same time.
Henderson and Setcos described the sequence of the
preventive resin restoration that is particularly applicable
for young patients with recently erupted teeth and minimally carious pits and fissures.30 They pointed out that
this preparation requires a meticulous technique that involves more time than the traditional occlusal amalgam
restoration. This type of restoration was advocated for
carefully selected non–stress-bearing areas to minimize
anatomic wear.
Occlusal surfaces often have small carious pits. For
minimal caries, restorations are not likely to be subjected
to substantial stresses that might lead to wear of resin materials. Figure 10-2 shows diagrams illustrating the principles of the sealant-composite combination. In this case

182

Chapter 10

n

Pit-and-Fissure Sealants and Preventive Resin Restorations

A
Sealant

Composite or
glass ionomerresin hybrid

B

Sealant
Composite

C
Figure 10-2 Diagrams illustrating the sealed composite resin

restoration. A, A cross-section showing caries extending to
the dentin. B, A cross-section through a preparation with a
glass-ionomer or composite restoration and a sealant.
C, An occlusal view of the outline of a small restoration
where a pit-and-fissure sealant illustrates the extension-forprevention principle of cavity preparation.

a small caries lesion has penetrated the dentin. In general,
bitewing radiographs should indicate no interproximal
caries.
A clinical series showing the sequence for this conservative preparation and restoration is portrayed in
Figure 10-3. Caries is identified by careful visual examination of a dry occlusal tooth surface with the use of a sharp
explorer, a mirror, and a light (see Fig. 10-3, A). Articulating paper marks on the tooth would indicate the points
of occlusal contact.

The tooth is anesthetized if necessary, isolated, and reexamined so that the extent of the caries process can be
determined. A No. 329 bur or a laser system approved for
hard tissue can be used to gain access to the depth of the
lesion and to complete caries removal (see Fig. 10-3, B).
The preparation, which should not extend to the occlusal
contact marks, is washed, dried, and examined.
The cavity and the enamel beside the susceptible
grooves are etched (see Fig. 10-3, C). A gel or liquid form
of 37% phosphoric acid is commonly used for 20 seconds.
Surface preparation with aluminum oxide air abrasion or
a laser system approved for hard tissue may not substitute for acid-etching. If these cleaning methods are used,
etchant must still be applied to provide adequate resinbonding enamel. The lingual grooves of maxillary molars
and the buccal grooves of mandibular molars are also commonly etched and sealed. The tooth is thoroughly washed
for approximately 30 to 40 seconds and completely dried.
A thin layer of bonding agent is applied to the cavity
(see Fig. 10-3, D). A stream of air must be used to thin the
bonding agent and to prevent pooling of bonding agent
in the cavity.
The cavities are filled with a light-curing composite or
resin-modified glass ionomer, which may be cured at this
time (see Fig. 10-3, E). A light-curing sealant is placed over
the remaining susceptible areas and brushed into the pits
and grooves (see Fig. 10-3, F). The materials are polymerized with visible light in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions.
The rubber dam is removed, and the occlusal contacts
are checked. A small-particle diamond rotary instrument
can be used to remove excess sealant and ensure centric
stops on the enamel (see Figs. 10-3, G and 10-3, H).
A meticulous technique is used in the selection, preparation, and restoration of minor pit-and-fissure caries
with the preventive resin restoration.
The long-term effectiveness of the bonded restoration
with sealant overlay has been proven. The restorations
have success equivalent to or better than that of amalgam
restorations. Once again, however, success is dependent
upon whether the sealant remains intact.
The use of flowable composite systems is also gaining
in popularity because they are easy to apply and because
evidence shows that less microleakage occurs with these
systems than when teeth are restored with condensable
composite resins, such as sealant materials that have
slightly more filler than filled sealants. Therefore the practical results of sealing with a flowable or a filled sealant
should not differ.
There is no single perfect conservative restoration.
Each dentist must decide, on an individual basis, the appropriate type of procedure. The restoration described can
be very effective in carefully selected cases.
Walker and associates reported on preventive resin restorations placed in patients from 6 to 18 years of age and
observed for up to 6.5 years.31 Of the 5185 restorations,
83% did not require further intervention. Those requiring
intervention included 37% that needed sealant alone and
21% that required treatment because of the development
of an interproximal lesion. Houpt and associates reported complete retention of 54% of their preventive resin

Chapter 10

n

A

B

C

D

E

F

G

H

Pit-and-Fissure Sealants and Preventive Resin Restorations

183

Figure 10-3 A, Occlusal caries identified with susceptible pits and grooves. B, Caries is removed from the dentin. C, The tooth

is etched. D, The bonding agent is placed. E, Composite resin is placed. F, Sealant is placed over resin. G, Polymerized preventive resin restoration. H, The occlusion is adjusted.

184

Chapter 10

n

Pit-and-Fissure Sealants and Preventive Resin Restorations

restorations, partial loss of sealant in 25%, and complete
loss of sealant in 20% after 9 years.32 Caries occurred in
25% of the teeth that had sealant loss, and 88% of the restored surfaces remained caries-free 9 years after treatment.
These researchers concluded that preventive restorations
produce excellent long-term results. Conservative cavity
preparation with sealing for prevention is a successful
approach for treating selected decayed teeth.

REFERENCES
1.	Buonocore MG: A simple method of increasing the adhesion of acrylic filling materials to enamel surfaces, J Dent Res
34:849–853, 1955.
2.	Bowen RL: Method of preparing a monomer having phenoxy and methacrylate groups linked by hydroxyl glycerol
groups, US Patent No 3:194, 783, July 1965.
3.	Dental sealants in the prevention of tooth decay: Proceedings of the National Institutes of Health Consensus Development Conference, J Dent Educ 48:4–131, 1984.
4.	Simonsen RJ: Retention and effectiveness of dental sealant
after 15 years, J Am Dent Assoc 122:34–42, 1991.
5.	Antonson SA, et al.: Twenty-four month clinical evaluation
of fissure sealants on partially erupted permanent first molars, J Am Dent Assoc 143(2):115–122, 2012.
6.	Griffin SO, et al.: The effectiveness of sealants in managing
caries lesions, J Dent Res 87(2):169–174, 2008.
7.	Azarpazhooh A, et al.: Pit and fissure sealants in the prevention of dental caries in children and adolescents: a systematic review, J Can Dent Assoc 74(2):171–177, 2008.
8.	Oong EM, et al.: The effect of dental sealants on bacteria levels in caries lesions, J Am Dent Assoc 139(3):271–278, 2008.
9.	Wendt L, Koch G: Fissure sealant in permanent first molars
after 10 years, Swed Dent J 12:181–185, 1988.
10.	Romcke RG, et al.: Retention and maintenance of fissure
sealants over 10 years, J Can Dent Assoc 56:235–237, 1990.
11.	Dennison JB, et al.: Effectiveness of sealant treatment over five
years in an insured population, J Am Dent Assoc 131:597–605,
2000.
12.	Robison VA, et al.: A longitudinal study of school children’s
experience in the North Carolina dental Medicaid program,
1984 through 1992, Am J Public Health 88:1669–1673, 1998.
13.	Koh SH, et al.: Effects of topical fluoride treatment on tensile
bond strength of pit and fissure sealants, Gen Dent 46:278–280,
1998.
14.	Warren DP, et al.: Effect of topical fluoride on retention of
pit and fissure sealants, J Dent Hyg 75:21–24, 2001.

15.	Beauchamp J, et al.: Evidence based clinical recommendations for the use of pit and fissure sealants, J Am Dent Assoc
139:257–268, 2008.
16.	Papers from the Pediatric Restorative Dentistry Consensus
Conference. San Antonio, Texas, April 15-16, 2002. Pediatr
Dent 24(5):374–516, 2002.
17.	Chi DL, et al.: Cost-effectiveness of pit-and-fissure sealants
on primary molars in Medicaid-enrolled children, Am J Pub
Health 104(3):555–561, 2014.
18.	Pope BD, et al.: Effectiveness of occlusal fissure cleansing methods and sealant micromorphology, J Dent Child 63:175–180,
1996.
19.	Hatibovic-Kofman S, et al.: Microleakage of sealants after
conventional, bur, and air-abrasion preparation of pits and
fissures, Pediatr Dent 20:173–176, 1998.
20.	Eidelman E, et al.: The retention of fissure sealants: rubber dam
or cotton rolls in a private practice, J Dent Child 50:259–261,
1983.
21.	Zidan O, Hill G: Phosphoric acid concentration: enamel surface loss and bonding strength, J Prosthet Dent 55:388–391,
1986.
22.	Redford DA, et al.: The effect of different etching times on
the sealant bond strength, etch depth, and pattern in primary teeth, Pediatr Dent 8:111–115, 1986.
23.	Phillips RW: Personal communication, 1986.
24.	Norling BK: Bonding. In Anusavice KJ, editor: Phillips’ science
of dental materials, ed 11, St. Louis, 2003, Saunders.
25.	Feigal RJ, et al.: Retaining sealants on salivary contaminated
enamel, J Am Dent Assoc 124:88–96, 1993.
26.	Choi JW, et al.: The efficacy of primer on sealant shear bond
strength, Pediatr Dent 19:286–288, 1997.
27.	Feigal RJ: Sealants and preventive restorations: review of effectiveness and clinical changes for improvement, Pediatr
Dent 20:85–92, 1998.
28.	Feigal RJ, et al.: Improved sealant retention with bonding
agents: a clinical study of two-bottle and single-bottle systems, J Dent Res 79:1850–1856, 2000.
29.	Simonsen RJ, Stallard RE: Sealant-restorations utilizing a diluted filled composite resin: one year results, Quintessence Int
8(6):77–84, 1977.
30.	Henderson HZ, Setcos JC: The sealed composite resin restoration, J Dent Child 52:300–302, 1985.
31.	Walker J, et al.: The effectiveness of preventive resin restorations in pediatric patients, J Dent Child 63:338–340,
1996.
32.	Houpt M, et al.: The preventive resin (composite resin/sealant)
restoration: nine-year results, Quintessence Int 25:155–159,
1994.

CHAPTER

11

Restorative Dentistry
s Jeffrey A. Dean and Kevin J. Donly

For additional resources, please visit the

website.

CHAPTER OUTLINE
STATUS OF COMMON RESTORATIVE
MATERIALS
MAINTENANCE OF A CLEAN FIELD
Armamentarium for Rubber Dam
Placement
Selection of a Clamp
ISOLITE SYSTEM
MORPHOLOGIC CONSIDERATIONS
BASIC PRINCIPLES IN CAVITY
PREPARATION IN PRIMARY TEETH
CAVITY PREPARATION IN PRIMARY
TEETH
Incipient Class I Cavity in a Very
Young Child
Pit or Fissure Class I Cavity
Deep-Seated Class I Cavity
Class II Cavity
Class III Cavity

A

Modified Class III Cavity Preparation
RESTORATION OF PROXIMAL
INCISAL CARIES IN PRIMARY
ANTERIOR TEETH
Aesthetic Resin Restoration
Stainless Steel Crowns
Direct Resin Crowns
PREPARATION OF CAVITIES IN
YOUNG PERMANENT TEETH
Interim Restoration for Hypoplastic
Permanent Molars
STAINLESS STEEL CROWNS FOR
POSTERIOR TEETH
Preparation of the Tooth
Selection of Crown Size
Contouring of the Crown
(When Necessary)

dvances in preventive dentistry and their application in the private dental office, the widespread acceptance of communal fluoridation,
and greater emphasis on dental health education have
dramatically changed the nature of dental practice. Today
the dentist devotes more time to preventive procedures
and less time to the routine restoration of caries-affected
teeth.
Nevertheless, restoration of caries lesions in primary
and young permanent teeth continues to be among the
important services that pediatric dentists and general
practitioners provide for the children in their practices.
Patients and fellow practitioners often judge dentists on
the effectiveness of their preventive programs and the skill
with which they perform routine operative procedures.
The Reference Manual of the American Academy of Pediatric Dentistry (AAPD) includes a Guideline on Pediatric
Restorative Dentistry (revised in 2012) that states the following, in part1:
Restorative treatment is based on the results of an
appropriate clinical examination and is ideally part of
a comprehensive treatment plan. The treatment plan
should consider the following:
  
1.	The developmental status of the dentition
2.	A caries-risk assessment
3.	Patient’s oral hygiene
4.	Anticipated parental compliance and likelihood of
timely recall

COSMETIC ZIRCONIA CROWNS
ALTERNATIVE RESTORATIVE
TREATMENT
COSMETIC RESTORATIVE
PROCEDURES FOR YOUNG
PERMANENT ANTERIOR TEETH
Bonded Composite Veneer
Restorations (Resin-Based
Composite Bonding)
Bonded Laminate Veneer
Restorations (Dental Laminates or
Laminate Veneers)
CONTROVERSIES IN PEDIATRIC
RESTORATIVE DENTISTRY
Laser Use
Minimalist Approach to Restorative
Care

5.	Patient’s ability to cooperate for treatment
  

The restorative treatment plan must be prepared in
conjunction with an individually tailored preventive program. Restoration of primary teeth differs significantly
from restoration of permanent teeth, due in part to the
differences in tooth morphology.
In 2002 AAPD, with financial assistance from the
American Society of Dentistry for Children, held a pediatric
restorative dentistry consensus conference in San Antonio, Texas. Sixteen literature review and position papers
were presented at the conference, and numerous consensus statements about appropriate pediatric restorative
materials and procedures were developed. The papers and
consensus statements are compiled in the September/
October 2002 issue of Pediatric Dentistry.

STATUS OF COMMON RESTORATIVE
MATERIALS
Advances in the development of improved biomaterials
for dental restorations have been rapid, and they continue to occur at a fast pace. This fact creates a significant
challenge for dentists striving to remain at the cutting
edge of dental technology. The more common restorative materials used in pediatric dentistry are composite
and other resin systems, glass ionomers, silver amalgam
alloys, and stainless steel alloys. Porcelain, zirconia,
and cast metal alloy materials are also used in pediatric
185

186

Chapter 11

n

Restorative Dentistry

restorative dentistry but less frequently than those listed
in the previous sentence.
Resin-based composites, glass ionomers, or some combination of the two are being used progressively more and
silver amalgam progressively less in pediatric restorative
dentistry; many pediatric dentistry practices do not use
silver amalgam at all; instead, some form of resin-based
composite or glass ionomer is used. These materials have
bonding capability. Glass ionomers may be considered
pharmacologically therapeutic because they release fluoride over time; they also have minimal shrinkage during
setting. Resin-based composites possess durability and
superior aesthetic qualities. When managed properly,
both materials are capable of providing excellent marginal
sealing at the tooth–restorative material interface. The
manufacturers of these materials have also combined
them in an effort to join the primary advantages of each
type of material. Berg has suggested that we think of these
materials and their combinations on a continuum, with
glass ionomer on the left, resin-based composite on the
right, and the combined materials somewhere in between,
depending on the relative amounts of each material in the
mix. Two major categories on the continuum are described
as “resin-modified glass ionomer” (or “hybrid ionomer” or
“light-cured glass ionomer”) and “compomers” (or “polyacid-modified composite resin” or “glass-ionomer–modified
resin-based composite”). A fifth formulation has been added
on the right side of the continuum in the form of “flowable
resin-based composite.” Berg points out that knowing the
particular strengths and weaknesses of each type of material
on the continuum will enhance the clinician’s ability to
make the best choices for each individual restorative situation.2 Use of any of these restorative materials generally
requires more effort and time than those needed for
corresponding conventional amalgam restorations.
Despite its declining use, silver amalgam remains one
of the most durable and cost-effective restorative materials. Success in the use of this filling material depends on
adherence to certain principles of cavity preparation that
do not always apply when materials on the glass-ionomer–
composite-resin continuum are used. Some renewed
interest in silver amalgam has occurred because of the
development of “bonded amalgams.” Bonded amalgams
are silver amalgam restorations that have been condensed
into etched cavity preparations lined with a dentin-bonding
agent and some material on the glass-ionomer–compositeresin continuum. Bonded amalgams require considerable
extra effort and expense to place compared with conventional amalgam restorations. The improvements in tooth
support and marginal integrity gained with these restorations have been demonstrated in many studies. Some
longer-term studies, however, suggest that the advantages
of bonded amalgams may be transient and relatively
short-lived, possibly 1 year or less.3,4 In general, the use
of bonded amalgams seems difficult to justify for the
routine restoration of primary teeth, because traditional
silver amalgam should provide comparable quality more
efficiently and cost-effectively in most situations.
Stainless steel alloy is another commonly used pediatric restorative material. It is used extensively for full
coronal coverage restorations of primary teeth. Stainless

steel crowns have undoubtedly preserved the function of
many primary teeth that otherwise would have been unrestorable. In addition, stainless steel crowns are often
used to restore all posterior teeth in young patients with
high risk for caries who exhibit multiple proximal lesions
that could otherwise be restored with silver amalgam
or aesthetic materials. Crowns are used instead simply
because they better protect all posterior tooth surfaces
from developing additional caries and because the posterior crown restoration has proven to be the most durable
and cost-effective in the primary dentition. Anterior and
posterior stainless steel crowns may have labial and/or
occlusal resin or porcelain veneers to enhance aesthetics.

MAINTENANCE OF A CLEAN FIELD
The maintenance of a clean operating field during cavity preparation and placement of the restorative material
helps ensure efficient operation and development of a serviceable restoration that will maintain the tooth and the
integrity of the developing occlusion.
The rubber dam aids in the maintenance of a clean
field. It is generally agreed that the use of the rubber dam
offers the following advantages:
1.	Saves time. The dentist who has not routinely used the
rubber dam needs only to follow the routine presented later in this chapter or a modification of it for a
reasonable period to be convinced that operating time
can be appreciably reduced. The time spent in placing
the rubber dam is negligible, as long as the dentist
works out a definite routine and uses a chairside assistant. Heise reported an average time of 1 minute
and 48 seconds to isolate an average of 2.8 teeth with
the rubber dam in 302 cases.5 These applications
of the rubber dam, placed with the aid of a capable
dental assistant, were for routine operative dentistry
procedures. The minimum time recorded for placing
a rubber dam was 15 seconds (single-tooth isolation),
and the maximum time was 6 minutes. Many of
the applications ranged 25 to 50 seconds. Heise also
observed that approximately 10 seconds are required
to remove the rubber dam. The elimination of rinsing
and spitting by the pediatric patient will invariably
make up for the time required for the placement of
the rubber dam and may save additional time.
2.	Aids management. A few explanatory words and
reference to the rubber dam as a “raincoat” for the
tooth or as a “Halloween mask” help allay the child’s
anxiety. It has been found through experience that
apprehensive or otherwise uncooperative children can
often be controlled more easily with a rubber dam
in place. Because the rubber dam efficiently controls
the patient’s tongue and lips, the dentist has greater
freedom to complete the operative procedures.
3.	Controls saliva. Control of saliva is an extremely
important consideration when one is completing
an ideal cavity preparation for primary teeth. The
margin of error is appreciably reduced when a cavity
is prepared in a primary tooth that has a large pulp
and extensive caries involvement. Small pulp exposures may be more easily detected when the tooth is

Chapter 11

well isolated. It is equally important to observe the
true extent of the exposure and the degree and type
of hemorrhage from the pulp tissue. Thus the rubber
dam aids the dentist in evaluating teeth that are being
considered for vital pulp therapy.
4.	Provides protection. The use of the rubber dam prevents
foreign objects from coming into contact with oral
structures. When filling material, debris, or medicaments are dropped into the mouth, salivary flow
is stimulated and interferes with the operative or
restorative procedure. A rubber dam also prevents the
small child in a reclining position from swallowing or
aspirating foreign objects and materials.
5.	Helps the dentist educate parents. Parents are always interested in the treatment that has been accomplished
for their child. While the rubber dam is in place, the
dentist can conveniently show parents the completed
work after an operative procedure. The rubber dam
creates the feeling that the dentist has complete control of the situation and that a conscientious effort
has been made to provide the highest type of service.

ARMAMENTARIUM FOR RUBBER DAM
PLACEMENT
The armamentarium consists of 5 × 5-inch sheets of medium latex, a rubber dam punch, clamp forceps, a selection of clamps, a flat-blade instrument, dental floss, and
a rubber dam frame. If one visualizes an approximately
1¼-inch square in the center of a sheet of rubber dam,
each corner of the square indicates where the punch holes
for the clamp-bearing tooth in each of the four quadrants
of the mouth are to be made (Fig. 11-1). As experience is
gained in applying the dam, the dentist and assistant will
soon learn the proper location for punching the holes.
If the holes are punched too far apart, the dam will not

Figure 11-1 The corners of the square represent points where

punch holes should be made for the clamp-bearing tooth.

n

Restorative Dentistry

187

readily fit between the contact areas. In addition, the
greater bulk of material between the teeth will greatly increase the possibility that the rubber will become a barrier
to proximal surface preparation. Conversely, if the holes
are punched too close together, salivary leakage will contaminate the operating field. In general, the holes should
be punched the same distance apart as the holes on the
cutting table of the rubber dam punch.
The large punch hole is used for the clamp-bearing
tooth and for most permanent molars, the medium-sized
punch hole generally is used for the premolars and primary molars, the second smallest hole is used for maxillary
permanent incisors, and the smallest hole is adequate for
the primary incisors and lower permanent incisors.

SELECTION OF A CLAMP
The operator will soon develop a personal preference
for specific clamps to use to secure the dam in isolating
different areas in the mouth. Unless the clamp is firmly
anchored to the tooth, the tension of the stretched rubber will easily dislodge it. Therefore proper selection of a
clamp is of utmost importance. It is recommended that
the clamp be tried on the tooth before the rubber dam is
placed, to ascertain that the clamp can be securely seated
and will not be easily dislodged by the probing tongue,
lip, or cheek musculature. An 18-inch length of dental
floss should be doubled and securely fastened to the bow
of the clamp. The floss will facilitate retrieval in the unlikely event that the clamp slips and falls toward the pharynx (Fig. 11-2).
The following procedure is recommended for rubber dam
application (Fig. 11-3). The previously selected and ligated
clamp is placed in the rubber dam. The dentist grasps the
clamp forceps with the clamp engaged. The assistant, seated
to the left of the patient (the dentist is right-handed in this
example), grasps the upper corners of the dam with the right
hand and the lower left corner between the left thumb and
index finger. The dam is moved toward the patient’s face as
the dentist carries the clamp to the tooth while holding the
lower right portion of the dam. After securing the clamp on

Figure 11-2 An Ivory No. 3 clamp has been trial-fitted to

the second primary molar. The clamp will be removed and
placed in the rubber dam.

188

Chapter 11

n

Restorative Dentistry

A

B

C

D

Figure 11-3 A, The dental assistant holds the top and lower right corners of the rubber dam as the dentist holds the lower left

corner and carries the clamp to the tooth. B, The assistant and dentist attach the corners of the rubber dam to the frame.
C, Dental floss is used to carry the rubber dam between the teeth. D, The teeth are isolated and ready for the operative procedure. (A, B, and C Courtesy of Dr. Richard Troyer.)

the tooth, the dentist transfers the clamp forceps to the assistant, who receives it while continuing to hold the upper corners of the dam with the right hand. The dentist then places
the frame over the rubber dam. Together the assistant and
dentist attach the corners of the dam to the frame. The flat
blade of a plastic instrument or a right-angle explorer may
be used to remove the rubber dam material from the wings
of the clamp and to complete the seal around the clamped
tooth. If necessary, light finger pressure may seat the clamp
securely by moving it cervically on the tooth. If additional
teeth are to be isolated, the rubber is stretched over them,
and the excess rubber between the punched holes is placed
between the contact areas with the aid of dental floss. The
most anterior tooth and others, if necessary, are ligated to
aid in the retention of the dam and prevention of cervical
leakage. The free ends of the floss are allowed to remain because they may aid in further retraction of the gingival tissue or the patient’s lip during the operative procedure. At
the end of the operative procedure, the length of floss will
also aid in removing the ligature.
When a quadrant of restorations in the primary dentition is planned and no pulp therapy is anticipated, Croll

recommends the “slit-dam method.”6 One long opening
is made in the dam, and the entire quadrant is isolated
without interseptal dam material between the teeth.
It is unwise to include more teeth in the rubber dam
than are necessary to isolate the working area adequately.
If the first or second permanent molar is the only tooth
in the quadrant that exhibits caries and if it requires only
an occlusal preparation, it is often desirable to punch
only one hole in the dam and isolate the single tooth
(Fig. 11-4). This procedure will require only seconds and
will save many minutes.
Due to an increase in latex allergies, latex-free rubber
dams are available and used in the same manner already
described.

ISOLITE SYSTEM
The Isolite system has also been recommended for
achieving an isolated field. This dental isolation device
is designed to function as a vacuum suction and to provide intraoral illumination. The system helps retract the
tongue and has an integrated six-foot-long vacuum/power

Chapter 11

n

Restorative Dentistry

189

B

A

Figure 11-4 A, The second permanent molar requires an occlusal restoration. It is not necessary to isolate more than a single

tooth. B, A No. 200 clamp has been selected to hold the rubber dam in place. The rubber dam has retracted the tissue that
extended over the distal marginal ridge.

A

B

C

Figure 11-5 A, The Isolite system attached to the unit’s vacuum. B, The isolation system folded for insertion into the oral cav-

ity. C, The isolation system position intraorally.

silicone hose that connects easily to most standard highvolume ports (Fig. 11-5).7

MORPHOLOGIC CONSIDERATIONS
The crowns of the primary teeth are smaller but more bulbous than those of the corresponding permanent teeth,
and the molars are bell-shaped, with a definite constriction in the cervical region. The characteristic sharp lingual inclination occlusal to the facial surfaces results in
the formation of a distinct faciogingival ridge that ends
abruptly at the cemento-enamel junction. The sharp constriction at the neck of the primary molar necessitates
special care in the formation of the gingival floor during
class II cavity preparation. The buccal and lingual surfaces
of the molars, sharply converging occlusally, form a narrow
occlusal surface or food table; this is especially true of the
first primary molar.

The pulpal outline of the primary teeth follows the
dentino-enamel junction more closely than that of the
permanent teeth. The pulpal horns are longer and more
pointed than the cusps would indicate. The dentin also
has less bulk or thickness, so the pulp is proportionately
larger than that of the permanent teeth. The enamel of
the primary teeth is thin but of uniform thickness. The
enamel surface tends to be parallel to the dentino-enamel
junction.

BASIC PRINCIPLES IN CAVITY
PREPARATION IN PRIMARY TEETH
Traditional cavity preparations for class I and class II
lesions include areas that have caries involvement and areas that retain food and plaque material and may be con­
sidered areas of potential caries involvement. A flat pulpal
floor is generally advocated. However, a sharp angle

190

Chapter 11

n

Restorative Dentistry

between the pulpal floor and the axial wall of a twosurface preparation should be avoided. Rounded angles
throughout the preparation will result in less concentration of stresses and will permit better adaptation of the re­
storative material into the extremities of the preparation.
Although the traditional class I cavity preparation and
restoration may occasionally be the most practical treatment for a tooth in certain circumstances, such treatment
is currently obsolete for most class I lesions. The traditional treatment has been replaced, for the most part,
by conservative caries excavation and restoration with a
combination of bonding restorative and sealant materials
(see Chapter 10).
Likewise, the traditional class II cavity preparation and
restoration, although not yet considered obsolete, are currently used less frequently as steadily improving restorative materials with therapeutic and bonding capability
are developed. In the traditional class II cavity preparation
for amalgam, the buccal and lingual extensions should be
carried to self-cleansing areas. The cavity design should
have greater buccal and lingual extension at the cervical
area of the preparation to clear contact with the adjacent
tooth. This divergent pattern is necessary because of the
broad, flat contact areas of the primary molars and because
of the distinct buccal bulge in the gingival third. Ideally
the width of the preparation at the isthmus should be approximately one-third the intercuspal dimension. The axiopulpal line angle should be beveled or grooved to reduce
the concentration of stresses and to provide greater bulk of
material in this area, which is vulnerable to fracture.
Because many occlusal fractures of amalgam restorations are caused by sharp opposing cusps, it is advisable to
identify these potentially damaging cusps with articulating paper before cavity preparation. The slight reduction
and rounding of a sharp opposing cusp will reduce the
number of such fractures.

CAVITY PREPARATION IN PRIMARY
TEETH
The steps in cavity preparation in a primary tooth are not
difficult, but they do require precise operator control. Many
authorities advocate the use of small, round-ended carbide
burs in the high-speed handpiece to establish the cavity
outline and perform the gross preparation. For efficiency
and convenience, all necessary high-speed instrumentation
for a given preparation may be completed with a single bur
in most situations. Therefore the dentist should select the
bur that is best designed to accomplish all the high-speed
cutting required for the procedure being planned. Figure
11-6 illustrates four high-speed carbide burs designed to
cut efficiently and yet allow for conservative cavity preparations with rounded line angles and point angles. Alternatively, cavity preparations may be made with aluminum
oxide air abrasion systems or with laser systems approved
for hard-tissue procedures, when indications allow.

INCIPIENT CLASS I CAVITY IN A VERY YOUNG
CHILD
During the routine examination of a child younger than
2 years of age, the dentist may occasionally discover a small

Figure 11-6 Round-ended, high-speed carbide burs No.

329, No. 330, No. 245, and No. 256, which may be used
for cutting cavity preparations.
but definite caries lesion in the central fossa of one or two
first primary molars, with all other teeth being sound. Thus
restorative needs are present but minimal. Because of the
child’s psychological immaturity and because it is usually
impossible to establish effective communication with the
child, the parent should hold the child on his or her lap
in the dental chair. This helps the child feel more secure
and provides a better opportunity to restrain the child’s
movement during the operative procedure. The small-cavity preparation may be made without the aid of a rubber
dam or local anesthetic. A No. 329 or No. 330 bur is used
to open the decayed area and extend the cavosurface margin only to the extent of the caries lesion. If the patient is
resistant (usually), completing the preparation with an air
abrasion or laser system would be inconvenient. The preparation can be completed in just a few seconds. Restoring
the tooth with amalgam or a resin-modified glass ionomer
arrests the decay and at least temporarily prevents further
tooth destruction without a lengthy or involved dental
appointment for the child. If the child is cooperative, a
preventive resin restoration, preceded by application of a
dentin-bonding agent, may be used.

PIT OR FISSURE CLASS I CAVITY
The preparation and restoration of a pit or fissure class
I cavity are discussed in the section on preventive resin
restoration in Chapter 10.

DEEP-SEATED CLASS I CAVITY
If an amalgam restoration is planned, the first step in the
preparation of an extensive class I cavity is to the enamel
that overhangs the extensive caries lesion. Then the cavity
preparation should be extended throughout the remaining
grooves and anatomic occlusal defects. The caries-affected
dentin should next be removed with large, round burs
or spoon excavators. If a caries exposure is not encountered, the cavity walls should be finished as previously

Chapter 11

n

Restorative Dentistry

191

described. With deep caries lesions and near pulp exposures, the depth of the cavity should be covered with a
biocompatible base material to provide adequate thermal
protection for the pulp.
If a resin-based composite and/or glass-ionomer restoration is planned, any disease-free pits and grooves may
be sealed as part of the bonded restoration. The restorative
material also provides thermal insulation to the pulp.

CLASS II CAVITY
Proximal lesions in a preschool child indicate excessive caries activity; a preventive and restorative program
should be undertaken immediately.

A

Small Lesions
Very small incipient proximal lesions may be chemically
restored with topical fluoride therapy provided by the
dentist, along with the judicious use of fluoride products
designed for topical application at home. If this treatment
regimen is accompanied by improved diet and improved
oral hygiene, some incipient proximal lesions may remineralize or remain in an arrested state indefinitely. However, the parents should be informed of the incipient lesions,
and emphasis should be placed on the need to continue
practicing the recommended procedures and to bring the
child back for periodic examinations. If the parents and
the patient do not follow the instructions properly, subsequent bitewing radiographs will reveal advancement of
the lesion, and restorative procedures should be initiated
before the defects become extensive caries lesions.
As bonded restorations have improved, especially those
restorations capable of fluoride release, more conservative
cavity preparation designs have also been advocated. In
otherwise sound teeth free of susceptible pits and fissures,
accessing small class II caries lesions via small openings in
the marginal ridges or in the facial surfaces of the teeth is
becoming a popular technique (Fig. 11-7). Gaining access to
the lesion with openings only large enough to allow caries
excavation is the goal. Caries is removed by pendulous motions of small burs or by tilting of the air abrasion tip laterally and pulpally at the initial opening. This technique is
particularly useful in cooperative patients who have one or
two affected primary molars and who are judged to be at relatively low risk for additional caries activity. Suwatviroj and
colleagues have shown in vitro that various tooth-colored
restorations placed in box-only preparations did not differ
in fracture resistance from those placed in dovetail preparations.8 However, resin-modified glass-ionomer restorations
placed in box-only preparations were more likely to show
adhesive failure than those placed in dovetail preparations.
Other researchers, Croll9 and Vaikuntam,10 have also
advocated conservative preparations and restorations with
fluoride-releasing restorative materials. Our experience has
shown that local anesthesia is usually unnecessary to make
the preparation. When this short procedure is performed
in cooperative patients, rubber dam isolation is often optional, especially on maxillary teeth. Use of resin-modified
glass-ionomer materials results in excellent restorations for
this conservative procedure (Fig. 11-8).
Marks and associates11 and Welbury12 and colleagues
(who also restored class I preparations) have reported

B
Figure 11-7 Approximating conservative preparations to

remove small class II caries lesions in primary molars.
A, Marginal ridge access. B, Facial surface access.

satisfactory results using conservative class II preparations
and compomers to restore primary molars in studies of 36
and 42 months’ duration, respectively. In a 3-year study,
Hubel and Mejàre reported the successful performance of
conservative class II resin-modified glass-ionomer restorations in primary molars.13

Lesions with Greater Dentin Involvement
The first step in the traditional preparation of a class II cavity in a primary tooth for an amalgam or an aesthetic restoration involves opening the marginal ridge area. Extreme
care must be taken when breaking through the marginal
ridge to prevent damage to the adjacent proximal surface.

Amalgam
The gingival seat and proximal walls should break contact
with the adjacent tooth. The angle formed by the axial wall
and the buccal and lingual walls of the proximal box should
approach a right angle. The buccal and lingual walls necessarily diverge toward the cervical region, following the general contour of the tooth (Fig. 11-9). The occlusal extension
of the preparation should include any caries-susceptible
pits and fissures. If the occlusal surface is sound and not
caries-susceptible, then a minimal occlusal dovetail is still
often needed to enhance the cavity retention form. If cariesaffected tooth structure remains after the preparation outline
is established, it should be removed next. The appropriate
liner or intermediate base, if indicated, and a snug-fitting
matrix should be placed before the amalgam is inserted.

192

Chapter 11

n

Restorative Dentistry

A

B

C

Figure 11-8 A, Conservative class II preparation. B, Resin-modified glass-ionomer restoration. C, Preoperative radiograph
(top) and 17-month postoperative film.

Aesthetic Materials
Because of improvements in the properties of resin-based
composites, many dentists use them routinely for posterior restorations. More recently the use of glass-ionomer
restoratives (or other materials on the glass-ionomer–
composite-resin continuum) has also been advocated.
The preparation and restoration may be similar to those
described earlier for amalgam when significant caries exists on both the occlusal and proximal surfaces. However,
little or no occlusal preparation may be required when
the occlusal pits and fissures are caries-susceptible but
sound or incipient. The proximal restoration may then
be combined with the application of an occlusal sealant
(with or without enameloplasty). Whenever composite
restorative materials are used, enamel beveling, etching,
and application of bonding agents are recommended.
Clinical trials of restorations of primary molars, reported by Paquette and colleagues14 and by Oldenburg and associates,15 revealed that traditional preparations modified
only by beveling of enamel margins and restored with
bonded resin-based composites yielded highly successful results during 12- and 24-month observation periods.
Tonn and Ryge also reported acceptable 2-year results for
primary molars restored with bonded resin-based composites in traditional cavity preparations modified only
by the beveling of enamel margins.16
Dilley and colleagues have demonstrated that the placement and finishing of posterior composite restorations are

Figure 11-9 Traditional class II cavity preparation for a

primary molar. The preparation includes diverging proximal
walls and a beveled and grooved axiopulpal line angle.
significantly more time consuming than those for comparable amalgam restorations.17 In addition to increasing
the cost of care, the extra time required for treatment may
complicate patient management for some young patients.
After 3 years of observation Donly and associates have
reported successful results for class II resin-modified glassionomer restorations in primary molars.18 In an interesting study by dos Santos and colleagues, class I and II
preparations in primary molars were restored with either
a resin-modified glass ionomer, a polyacid-modified

Chapter 11

composite, or a traditional resin-based composite. After
24 months no statistically significant differences were
found among the materials, although, not too surprisingly, the class I restorations showed higher survival rates
than did the class II restorations.19 The dentist’s sound
professional judgment is the key to selecting the restoration that will best serve the patient in each situation.

Resin Infiltrate
Recently introduced to the marketplace is a resin infiltrate (icon-DMG, Hamburg, Germany) designed to infiltrate subsurface lesions, preventing lesion advancement.
Enamel is etched with hydrochloric acid prior to the
placement of the resin. The resin can be placed on facial
or lingual tooth surfaces and proximal lesions. An applicator specifically designed to allow proximal flow of the
resin is provided by the manufacturer. The resin is toothcolored but not radiopaque.
In a 1-year clinical study involving 42 children (mean
age, 7.17 years), a resin infiltrate and 5% sodium fluoride
varnish were placed on two subsurface enamel lesions. After 1 year 31% of the lesions treated with resin infiltrate
had progressed compared with 67% of the lesions treated
with 5% sodium fluoride varnish.20 In another clinical trial
with 22 adults, 29 lesion pairs, where the lesion was located
in the inner half of enamel to the outer third of dentin,
had either a resin infiltrate or no treatment provided. After
3 years 4% of the lesions treated with resin infiltrate had
progressed, and 42% of lesions that received no treatment
had progressed.21 Another clinical trial with 39 adults with
three proximal lesions in the outer third of dentin received
a resin infiltrate, a sealant, and one lesion was left untreated
(control). After 3 years there was no significant difference
in the progression of the lesions treated with the resin infiltrate or sealant; however, both the resin infiltrate and sealant were significantly better at inhibiting lesion progression
than was the untreated control.22 Analysis of future clinical
data will provide further information on the effectiveness
of and indications for resin infiltrate in pediatric dentistry.

CLASS III CAVITY
Caries lesions on the proximal surfaces of anterior primary teeth sometimes occur in children whose teeth are in
contact and in children who have evidence of arch inadequacy or crowding. Caries involvement of the anterior
primary teeth, however, may be interpreted as evidence
of excessive caries activity requiring a comprehensive preventive program.
If the caries lesion has not advanced appreciably into
the dentin and if removal of the caries will not involve
or weaken the incisal angle, a small conventional class III
cavity may be prepared and the tooth may be restored with
the dentist’s choice of bonding materials (Fig. 11-10).
Mandibular primary incisors with small proximal caries
lesions may not require conventional restorations at all.
Enameloplasty of the affected proximal surface (usually
described as “disking”) to open the proximal contact and
remove most, if not all, of the cavitation, followed by topical treatments with fluoride varnish, will often suffice until
the teeth exfoliate naturally. Extraction is usually indicated
when mandibular primary incisors have extensive caries.

A

n

Restorative Dentistry

193

B

Figure 11-10 A, Schematic drawing of caries lesions on the

mesial surfaces of maxillary primary central incisors that do
not undermine the mesial angles of the teeth. The dotted line indicates the proposed labial outline of the class
III cavity preparation. B, Proximal view illustrates that the
class III preparation is limited to the cervical two thirds of
the primary incisor. (From Roche JR: Restorative dentistry. In
Goldman HM et al, eds. Current therapy in dentistry, vol 4,
St. Louis, 1970, Mosby.)

Figure 11-11 Lingual and labial views of a modified class

III preparation for a maxillary primary canine. The dovetail
improves the retention form of the preparation and allows
access for placement of the restorative material to ensure
adequate contact with the adjacent tooth.

MODIFIED CLASS III CAVITY PREPARATION
The distal surface of the primary canine is a frequent site
of caries attack in patients at high risk for caries if the canine is in proximal contact with the first molar. The position of the tooth in the arch, the characteristically broad
contact between the distal surface of the canine and the
mesial surface of the primary molar, and the height of the
gingival tissue sometimes make it difficult to prepare a
typical class III cavity and restore it adequately. The modified class III preparation uses a dovetail on the lingual or
occasionally on the labial surfaces of the tooth. A lingual
lock is normally considered for the maxillary canine,
whereas a labial lock may be more conveniently prepared
on the mandibular teeth, for which the aesthetic requirement is not as important (Figs. 11-11 and 11-12). The
preparation allows for the additional retention and access
necessary for proper insertion of the restorative material.
Trairatvorakul and Piwat compared 31 paired slot
preparations with dovetail class III preparations in primary anterior teeth in a well-controlled clinical study in
children from 2 years 6 months to 5 years 3 months of
age.23 All teeth were restored with composite and evaluated for marginal adaptation, anatomic form, secondary
caries, and marginal discoloration at 6, 12, and 24 months.
Twenty-two pairs of restorations were available at the end
of the study. In the slot group only one restoration was

194

Chapter 11

n

Restorative Dentistry

unacceptable and in the dovetail group three were unacceptable. There was no statistically significant difference between
the two groups. These results suggest that the simpler and
more conservative slot preparation may often be preferred.

RESTORATION OF PROXIMAL INCISAL
CARIES IN PRIMARY ANTERIOR TEETH
AESTHETIC RESIN RESTORATION
One type of preparation used for the aesthetic restoration
of primary incisors in which dental caries approximates
or involves the incisal edge of the teeth is illustrated in
Figure 11-13. As with other operative procedures for the

Figure 11-12 Lingual and labial views of a modified class III

preparation for a mandibular primary canine.

pediatric patient, the use of the rubber dam aids in maintenance of a dry field, provides better vision for the clinician,
and facilitates control of the patient’s lips and tongue.
The preparation includes a proximal reduction through
the incisal angle and the caries lesion, and ends at the established cervical seat. Labial and lingual locks are then
prepared in the cervical third of the tooth. The remaining caries is removed, the tooth is etched, and a bonding
agent is applied.
A properly placed matrix tightly wedged at the cervical
seat aids the operator in placing, shaping, and holding
the resin-based composite during the curing process. A
good matrix also simplifies the finishing procedures.
McEvoy described a similar preparation and restoration for primary incisors, except that the retentive locking component is placed on the labial surface only in the
gingival third of the tooth.24 The lock extends minimally
across two thirds of the labial surface and may extend
even farther to include decalcified enamel in the cervical
area. We also recommend beveling the enamel margins
slightly before etching, to further improve the marginal
bonding of the restoration.
Initial shaping of the restoration may be accomplished
with a flame-shaped finishing bur. The excess resin is removed, and the contour of the restoration is established.
The gingival margins may be finished with a sharp scalpel
blade. Final polishing may be accomplished with the rubber cup and a fine, moist abrasive material or one of the
composite polishing systems (Fig. 11-14).

Figure 11-13 Labial, proximolingual,

and lingual views of a preparation for
an aesthetic resin restoration in a primary incisor. The preparation includes
a proximal reduction and the establishment of a definitive cervical seat that
extends to labial and lingual locks in
the cervical third of the tooth.

A

B

Figure 11-14 A, Extensive caries lesions of the maxillary right central, left central, and lateral incisors of a 3½-year-old patient.
B, Postoperative view of the restored teeth. The restorations are retained with labial and lingual locks incorporated into the
preparations. The maxillary lateral preparation was designed as illustrated in Fig. 7-13.

Chapter 11

STAINLESS STEEL CROWNS
Primary incisors or canines that have extensive proximal
lesions involving the incisal portion of the tooth may be
restored with stainless steel crowns.
A stainless steel crown of appropriate size is selected,
contoured at the cervical margin, polished, and cemented
into place. (The crown technique is discussed in detail later
in this chapter.) Although the crown will be well retained
even on teeth that require removal of extensive portions of

n

Restorative Dentistry

195

caries-affected tooth structure, the aesthetic requirements of
some children may not be met by this type of restoration.
Most of the labial metal may be cut away, leaving a labial “window” that is then restored with resin-based composite (Fig. 11-15). This restoration is called an open-face
stainless steel crown.
Several brands of stainless steel crowns with aesthetic
facings preveneered to the labial surfaces are also available
to restore primary anterior teeth (Fig. 11-16). Such crowns
are available for direct adaptation to the prepared teeth
and have had a significant amount of success. One retrospective study of 226 crowns has shown that an overall
91% of crowns retained good to excellent clinical appearance.25 Alternatively the restorations may be completed
in two appointments, with the labial veneers added in the
laboratory after the bare stainless steel crowns are adapted
to the teeth but before final cementation.
Croll recommends that an anterior alginate impression
be made before the restorative appointment.26 The crown
preparations can then be simulated on a stone model,

A

A

B

C
Figure 11-15 A, After the removal of caries in the maxillary
left primary lateral incisor and preparation of the tooth,
a stainless steel crown was fitted to the tooth and, B, the
labial portion of the stainless steel crown was removed. C,
The facial surface was then restored with resin.

B
Figure 11-16 A, Extensive caries involving the maxillary primary incisors. B, Resin-faced stainless steel crowns following
cementation with a glass-ionomer cement.

196

Chapter 11

n

Restorative Dentistry

and most of the crown adaptation can be achieved in advance. This procedure enables the clinician to cement the
crowns in the same appointment at which the preparations are made (rather than waiting for laboratory veneering of the adapted bare crowns). Croll’s technique also
gives the clinician a better opportunity to focus on fitting
the crowns so that optimal tooth alignment will result,
which further enhances the aesthetic outcome.

DIRECT RESIN CROWNS
Webber and associates27 described the resin crown technique wherein the tooth is restored with resin-based composite with a celluloid crown form used as a matrix. They
point out that very little finishing of the restoration is required when the celluloid crown has been properly fitted.
The jacket crown technique illustrated in Figure 11-17
incorporates the use of a celluloid crown form and resinbased composite as advocated by Webber and associates23
and today is commonly called a “strip crown.” In a

retrospective study by Kupietzky and others, strip crowns
were shown to perform well for restoring primary incisors
with large or multisurface caries for periods of more than
3 years. There was an 80% overall retention rate for the
145 restorations.28
Celluloid crown forms are also available for primary
posterior teeth. These crown forms are useful matrices
for some posterior bonded restorations. A good example
of an indication for the use of such a crown form is to
provide a bonded crown buildup for temporary reestablishment of arch integrity and occlusion of an ankylosed
(submerged) primary molar.

PREPARATION OF CAVITIES IN YOUNG
PERMANENT TEETH
Many of the caries management procedures presented
in this textbook also often apply to young permanent
teeth. Entire textbooks are devoted to operative dentistry

A

B

C

D

Figure 11-17 A, Extensive caries of the primary maxillary right central, left central, and left lateral incisors of a 4-year-old
patient. B, Fitted celluloid crown forms were trimmed to just cover the cervical margins of the prepared teeth. C, Two-thirds
filled with a heavily filled resin-based composite, seated over the prepared teeth, with excess resin being removed from the
cervical margins and light polymerization. D, Polishing.

Chapter 11

procedures, and the primary focus of these books is restoration of permanent teeth. Repeating all of that information
(or portions thereof) in this chapter is impractical and
unrealistic. For detailed information about the various
cavity preparation designs for permanent teeth and the
matrix systems to facilitate the placement and contour
of restorations, please consult a standard textbook of
operative dentistry listed in the references, such as the
text by Roberson and colleagues.29

INTERIM RESTORATION FOR HYPOPLASTIC
PERMANENT MOLARS
The dentist who routinely treats children occasionally faces
a difficult restorative problem when severely hypoplastic
first permanent molars erupt. Often the teeth are so defective that they require restoration at a very early stage of
eruption. Many of these teeth have been saved by early restoration with stainless steel crowns as an interim procedure.
However, this procedure may require sacrificing sound
tooth surfaces to provide adequate space for the crown.
Such full-coverage restorations are sometimes difficult to fit.
The composite materials have proved to provide a more
satisfactory interim restoration for many of these teeth.
Such a bonded composite build-up restoration allows for
the preservation of all sound tooth structure and depends
on the presence of some enamel surfaces to provide bonded
retention for the restorative material. Any soft defective
areas are excavated, but little or no additional tooth prepa­
ration is done. Usually even undermined enamel surfaces
are preserved for additional retention and support of the
restorative material. In some cases gingivoplasty around
the erupting tooth may first be necessary to allow for
adequate access to and isolation of the defective areas.
Even if the restoration requires occasional repair, it still
often provides a more satisfactory interim result than the
stainless steel crown. Some of the newer restorative materials on the glass-ionomer–composite-resin continuum
may provide an even better interim restoration for hypoplastic teeth because of their ability to release fluoride and
to bond to hypoplastic enamel.
In situations where a stainless steel crown is required to restore a young permanent molar, Radcliffe
and C
­ ullen have noted the importance of conservative
tooth preparation to preserve better options for future restoration of the same tooth.30 They advocate a
prep­aration similar to that described in the following
­section.

n

Restorative Dentistry

197

3.	Restorations for teeth with hereditary anomalies, such
as dentinogenesis imperfecta or amelogenesis
imperfecta
4.	Restorations for pulpotomized or pulpectomized
primary or young permanent teeth when there is
increased danger of fracture of the remaining coronal
tooth structure
5.	Restorations for fractured teeth
6.	Restorations for primary teeth to be used as abutments for appliances
7.	Attachments for habit-breaking and orthodontic
appliances
  
Randall published an extensive review of the literature
that reports on the use of preformed metal crowns for
primary and permanent molars.32 She found five clinical
studies that compared the performance of crown restorations with that of multisurface amalgam restorations.
The five studies included a total of 1210 crowns and 2201
amalgams that were followed from a minimum of 2 years
to a maximum of 10 years. The findings in all five studies were in agreement that the crown restorations were
superior to the amalgam restorations in the treatment of
multisurface cavities in primary molars. Randall’s review
was followed by a position paper prepared by Seale that
included additional scientific evidence favoring the use of
stainless steel crown restorations, especially in children at
high risk for caries.33 Seale’s published abstract states the
following:

A

STAINLESS STEEL CROWNS FOR
POSTERIOR TEETH
Chrome steel crowns, as introduced by Humphrey in
1950, have proved to be serviceable restorations for children and adolescents and are now commonly called stainless steel crowns.31 The indications for the use of stainless
steel crowns in pediatric dentistry include the following:
1.	Restorations for primary or young permanent teeth
with extensive and/or multiple caries lesions (Fig. 11-18)
2.	Restorations for hypoplastic primary or permanent
teeth that cannot be adequately restored with bonded
restorations

B
Figure 11-18 A, Primary molars with extensive caries lesions. B, Adequately contoured stainless steel crowns have
maintained function and the relationship of the primary
teeth in the arch.

198

Chapter 11

n

Restorative Dentistry

The stainless steel crown (SSC) is an extremely durable restoration. Children with extensive decay,
large lesions or multiple surface lesions in primary molars should be treated with stainless steel
crowns. Because of the protection from future decay provided by their feature of full coverage and
their increased durability and longevity, strong
consideration should be given to the use of SSCs in
children who require general anesthesia. Finally, a
strong argument for the use of the SSC restoration
is its cost effectiveness based on its durability and
longevity.

PREPARATION OF THE TOOTH
A local anesthetic should be administered and a rubber
dam placed as for other restorative procedures. The proximal surfaces are reduced using a No. 69L bur at high speed
(Fig. 11-19). Care must be taken not to damage adjacent
tooth surfaces during the proximal reductions. A wooden
wedge may be placed tightly between the surface being
reduced and the adjacent surface to provide a slight separation between the teeth for better access. Near-vertical
reductions are made on the proximal surfaces and carried
gingivally until the contact with the adjacent tooth is

A

B

C

D

Figure 11-19 Steps in the preparation of a primary molar for a stainless steel crown restoration with a No. 69L bur in the high-

speed handpiece. A, Mesial reduction. B, Distal reduction. C, Occlusal reduction. D, Rounding of the line angles.

Chapter 11

broken and an explorer can be passed freely between the
prepared tooth and the adjacent tooth. The gingival margin of the preparation on the proximal surface should
be a smooth feathered edge with no ledge or shoulder
present. The cusps and the occlusal portion of the tooth
may then be reduced with a No. 69L bur revolving at
high speed. The general contour of the occlusal surface is
followed, and approximately 1 mm of clearance with the
opposing teeth is required.
The No. 69L bur at high speed may also be used to
remove all sharp line and point angles. It is usually not
necessary to reduce the buccal or lingual surfaces; in fact,
it is desirable to have an undercut on these surfaces to aid
in the retention of the contoured crown. In some cases,
however, it may be necessary to reduce the distinct buccal
bulge, particularly on the first primary molar.
If any caries-affected dentin remains after these steps
in crown preparation are completed, it is excavated next.
In the event that a vital pulp exposure is encountered, a
pulpotomy procedure is usually carried out.

SELECTION OF CROWN SIZE
The smallest crown that completely covers the preparation should be chosen. Spedding has advocated adhering to two important principles that will help to produce
well-adapted stainless steel crowns consistently.34 First,
the operator must establish the correct occlusogingival
crown length; and second, the crown margins should be
shaped circumferentially to follow the natural contours
of the tooth’s marginal gingivae. The crown should be reduced in height, if necessary, until it clears the occlusion
and is approximately 0.5 to 1 mm beneath the free margin of the gingival tissue. The patient can force the crown
over the preparation by biting an orangewood stick or
a tongue depressor. After making a scratch mark on the
crown at the level of the free margin of the gingival tissue,
the dentist can remove the crown and determine where
additional metal must be cut away with No. 11B curved
shears or a rotating stone (Fig. 11-20).
With curved-beak pliers, the cut edges of the crown
are redirected cervically, and the crown is replaced on
the preparation. The child is again directed to bite on an
orangewood stick to seat the crown forcibly so that the
gingival margins may be checked for proper extension.
The precontoured and festooned crowns currently
available often require very little, if any, modification before cementation.

CONTOURING OF THE CROWN (WHEN
NECESSARY)
Crown-contouring pliers with a ball-and-socket design
are used at the cervical third (if loosely fitting, start at the
middle third) of the buccal and lingual surfaces to help
adapt the margins of the crown to the cervical portion
of the tooth. The handles of the pliers are tipped toward
the center of the crown, so that the metal is stretched and
curled inward as the crown is moved toward the pliers
from the opposite side. Curved-beak pliers are used to further improve the contour on the buccal and lingual surfaces (Fig. 11-21). The curved-beak pliers may also be used
to contour the proximal areas of the crown and develop

n

Restorative Dentistry

199

desirable contact with adjacent teeth. Many clinicians
prefer to complete the crown-contouring procedures with
crown-crimping pliers (Fig. 11-22). If necessary, solder
may be added to the proximal surfaces of the crown to
improve the proximal contacts and contour. Trimming
and contouring are continued until the crown fits the
preparation snugly and extends under the free margin of
the gingival tissue.
The crown should be replaced on the preparation
after the contouring procedure to ensure that it snaps
securely into place. The occlusion should be checked
at this stage to ensure that the crown is not opening
the bite or causing a shifting of the mandible into
an undesirable relationship with the opposing teeth
(Fig. 11-23).
The final step before cementation is to produce a beveled gingival margin that may be polished and that will
be well tolerated by the gingival tissue. A rubber abrasive
wheel can be used to produce the smooth margin.
On occasion, the best-fitting crown may need to be
modified to produce a more desirable adaptation to the
prepared cervical margin. Mink and Hill have referred to
methods of modifying stainless steel crowns for primary
and permanent teeth.35 The oversized crown may be cut
as illustrated in Figure 11-24 and the cut edges overlapped.
The crown is replaced on the tooth to ensure that it now fits
snugly at the cervical region, and a scratch is made at the
overlapped margin. The crown is removed from the tooth,
and the overlapped material is repositioned and welded. A
small amount of solder is allowed to flow over the outside
margin. The crown is finished in the previously recommended manner and cemented to the prepared tooth.
If the dentist encounters a tooth that is too large for
the largest crown, a similar technique may be helpful.
The crown may be cut on the buccal or lingual surface.
After the crown has been adapted to the prepared tooth,
an additional piece of 0.004-inch stainless steel band
material may be welded into place. A small amount of
solder should be added to the outer surfaces of the margins. The crown may then be contoured in the usual
manner, polished, and cemented into place (Video 11-1:
Restorative techniques).
Finally, just as with crowns for anterior teeth, preveneered stainless steel crowns for posterior primary teeth
have been developed. These crowns require considerably
more crown preparation than conventional stainless steel
crowns, but Yilmaz and Kocogullari have reported success
rates as high as 80%.36

Figure 11-20 A scratch is made at the level of the free

margin of the gingival tissue as an aid in determining where
additional metal must be removed.

200

Chapter 11

n

Restorative Dentistry

A

Figure 11-22 Crown-crimping pliers may also be used for

crown contouring.

B

Figure 11-23 Final adaptation of the crown should result in

good occlusion before cementation.

C
Figure 11-21 A, Crown-contouring pliers are used to
contour the buccal and lingual surfaces of the crown. The
crown is held firmly with the pliers, and pressure is exerted
with the finger from the opposite side of the crown to bend
the surface inward. B, The curved-beak pliers are “walked”
completely around the cervical margins of the crown to
direct all margins inward with smooth, flowing contour.
C, The crown on the right was the same size and shape as
the crown on the left before it was contoured. This illustrates the effectiveness of the contouring procedures with
the pliers as described.

Figure 11-24 Technique for adapting an oversized crown to

a prepared tooth.

COSMETIC ZIRCONIA CROWNS
Zirconia crowns are now marketed for the aesthetic restoration of primary anterior (Fig. 11-25) and posterior teeth
(Fig. 11-26). These crowns offer a very aesthetic appearance while providing a durable crown. An in vitro study
has demonstrated that natural teeth opposing zirconia

Chapter 11

n

Restorative Dentistry

201

A

A
B
Figure 11-25 A, Extensive caries of the maxillary primary
lateral incisors, with caries involving the lingual surfaces
of the central incisors. B, The lateral incisors restored with
resin-faced crowns and the central incisors restored with
zirconia crowns.

crowns have much more favorable wear than natural
teeth opposing porcelain crowns. Further use of these
crowns and clinical research will offer additional information for these crowns in the future.37

ALTERNATIVE RESTORATIVE TREATMENT
Alternative or atraumatic restorative treatment (ART) has become a popular descriptive term to describe a conservative
method of managing both small and large caries lesions
when treating the disease by more traditional restorative
procedures is impossible or impractical for many reasons,
including lack of access to traditional dental settings. This
method may prevent pain and preserve teeth in individuals who do not have access to regular and conventional
oral health care. ART may be performed with only hand
instruments when no other dental equipment is available,
but it may be useful sometimes in the conventional dental
setting as well. ART does not require complete excavation
of dentinal caries before placement of the restorative material. This is not a totally new concept in dentistry, but
it has enjoyed renewed recognition as a viable restorative
approach because of the development of the more durable
fluoride-releasing glass-ionomer and resin-modified glassionomer restorative materials. (The principles validating
this technique are discussed in the section Treatment of
the Deep Caries Lesion in Chapter 13)
This technique is promoted and endorsed by the World
Health Organization with the goals of preserving tooth
structure, reducing infection, and avoiding discomfort.
Recognizing the technique as a means of restoring and
preventing dental caries, the International Association for

B
Figure 11-26 A, A mandibular first primary molar exhibiting
occlusodistal caries. B, A posterior primary molar zirconia
crown cemented with resin cement.

Dental Research held a symposium on ART in June 1995.
The procedure does not require a traditional dental setting.
Preventive measures to control the bacterial infection and
the causative agents of the disease should also be used for
optimal results following treatment.
In 2008 AAPD added the term interim therapeutic restorative technique (ITR). The reference manual differentiates
ART from ITR as follows1:
Because circumstances do not allow for follow-up
care, ART has been mistakenly interpreted as a definitive restoration. ITR utilizes similar techniques,
but has different therapeutic goals. ITR more accurately describes the procedure used in contemporary dental practice.

202

Chapter 11

n

Restorative Dentistry

A

B

Figure 11-27 A, Undersized maxillary right lateral incisor in a young patient. B, Improved appearance of tooth after restoration with a bonded laminate veneer restoration.

COSMETIC RESTORATIVE PROCEDURES
FOR YOUNG PERMANENT ANTERIOR
TEETH
A common problem confronting dentists who treat children is the aesthetic management of anterior teeth that
are discolored, developmentally undersized or malformed,
malposed, or fractured. Dentists recognize that aesthetic
impairments of the teeth often adversely affect the social
and psychological development of the growing child.
Aesthetic restorative systems and bonding techniques are
usually used when restorations are indicated in these situations. Although bonding procedures are also applicable
to primary tooth restorations (as described earlier in this
chapter), the following discussion applies primarily to
permanent anterior teeth simply because few indications
are encountered in the primary dentition. However, Aron
has reported the successful use of bonded porcelain veneers for primary incisors in a young patient.38
The following discussion assumes that one understands
dental bonding principles and has a working knowledge
of the process. These principles and procedures are similar
for sealants, restorative resins, and resin luting agents (see
Chapter 10). Some tooth preparation confined to enamel
(as much as possible) is often indicated, although not always required, before cosmetic bonding procedures are
performed.

BONDED COMPOSITE VENEER RESTORATIONS
(RESIN-BASED COMPOSITE BONDING)
Resin-based composite restoratives (and bonding agents)
are frequently applied directly to etched enamel. The
restorative resin simply becomes a veneer to improve
tooth color or contour. Restorative resin-bonding techniques are particularly useful for restoring anterior
crown fractures (see Chapter 27) and for cosmetically
increasing the mesial-distal widths of young permanent
anterior teeth (Fig. 11-27). Bonded composite veneers
are also useful for restoring small hypoplastic or discolored areas on visible tooth surfaces. Many dentists also

use this type of restoration to mask intrinsic discolorations by veneering the entire labial surfaces of the discolored anterior teeth (Fig. 11-28). This approach may
provide satisfactory cosmetic restorations for teeth with
mild to moderate discolorations that will not respond to
the bleaching or microabrasion procedures discussed in
Chapter 3.

BONDED LAMINATE VENEER RESTORATIONS
(DENTAL LAMINATES OR LAMINATE VENEERS)
The use of thin, prefitted porcelain facings (laminate veneers) that are bonded to enamel surfaces has become
commonplace in cosmetic dentistry. Interest in laminate veneer restorations has grown steadily since their
introduction by Faunce and Faunce.39 Such restorations
for maxillary anterior teeth are recognized as conservative, aesthetically satisfactory restorations, especially in
children and young adults. Laminate veneer restorations
have also been used successfully on mandibular anterior
teeth.
The laminate veneer technique offers aesthetic improvement because the restored teeth simulate the natural
hue and appearance of normal, healthy tooth structure.
When properly finished, the laminate restorations are well
tolerated by the gingival tissues, even though their contour may be slightly excessive. Immaculate oral hygiene is
essential, but experience has shown that the maintenance
of gingival health around the restorations is certainly possible in cooperative patients (Fig. 11-29).
The luting materials are tooth-colored resin systems
designed for use in bonding techniques. If the teeth being
treated are severely discolored, tinting or opaquing agents
may also be required. The laminate veneer procedure is
not complicated, but it requires meticulous attention to
detail for success.
The bonding procedure for a laminate veneer restoration requires proper preparation of the inside laminate
surface and proper etching of the outer enamel surface.
The inside of the porcelain laminate surface is etched
with a hydrofluoric acid etchant and then coated with

Chapter 11

A

B

C
Figure 11-28 Resin-based composite bonding. A, Pre-

n

Restorative Dentistry

203

A

B

C

operative appearance of a 15-year-old girl who said, “I
don’t like my teeth.” B, A heavily filled resin-based composite
restorative material bonded to teeth 9, 10, and 11 with a
chamfer preparation placed. C, Postoperative appearance of
finished restorations after placement of a microfilled resinbased composite.

Figure 11-29 A, Anterior teeth of a teenaged patient
after the removal of bonded orthodontic appliances. The
hypoplastic defects are obvious on the canines and lateral
incisors, and the central incisors are mildly affected as well.
B, Photograph of same patient after completion of the
intraenamel preparations. C, Bonded resin veneer restorations. (Courtesy of Dr. Nasser Barghi.)

silane, which results in a bond with the resin luting agent
similar to that achieved on etched enamel but also enhanced chemically by the silane. Excellent bond strengths
to the porcelain surface have been reported by Lee and
colleagues.40
The intraenamel preparation includes removal of
0.5 to 1 mm of facial enamel, tapering to about 0.25 to
0.5 mm at the cervical margin. This margin is finished

in a well-defined chamfer with the crest of the gingival margin not more than 0.5 mm subgingivally. The
incisal margin may end just short of the incisal edge,
or it may include the entire incisal edge ending on the
lingual surface. It is better not to place incisal margins
where direct incising forces occur. Bonded porcelain
techniques have significant value in cosmetic dental
procedures (Fig. 11-30).

204

Chapter 11

n

Restorative Dentistry

A
A

B

B

C
Figure 11-30 A, Severe tooth “pitting” and discoloration in
a teenager. B, The teeth are prepared for porcelain-bonded
veneer restorations. C, Final porcelain veneer restorations.
(Courtesy of Dr. Nasser Barghi.)

Figure 11-31 A, Adjacent interproximal lesions on teeth E
and F. B, Sluiceway opened up with a high-speed handpiece to allow for direct fluoride varnish application and
easier cleansing with brushing. No restoration was placed.

the need for different equipment for different applications, and the need for additional practitioner training in
the methodology. However, despite acknowledging that
cavity preparation with a laser takes longer and smells unpleasant, one study42 has recently shown that adolescents
prefer the laser to conventional preparation because they
found it more comfortable. For a more thorough review,
see Olivi and colleagues’43 user guide entitled Pediatric Laser
Dentistry.

MINIMALIST APPROACH TO RESTORATIVE CARE
Refer to the text by Nixon41 for additional information
on the many varieties of materials and techniques available for dental cosmetic procedures.

CONTROVERSIES IN PEDIATRIC
RESTORATIVE DENTISTRY
LASER USE
In 2013 AAPD released its first policy statement on the use
of lasers for pediatric dental patients. While lasers are recognized as a viable alternative to traditional preparation
tools in restorative dentistry, as with any tool there are
advantages and limitations, and perhaps laser use is best
viewed as an alternative and complementary method.
Less heat generation, the necessity for little or no local anesthesia, and removal of caries with minimal involvement
of surrounding tooth structure are among several advantages of lasers. Limitations include high start-up costs,

Many of us are familiar with the technique demonstrated
in Figure 11-31, where adjacent interproximal lesions have
been managed by simply opening up the contact between
the two teeth with a high-speed handpiece, applying
fluoride varnish, and having the parents use focused
toothbrushing in the area to slow or arrest the decay. This
is used particularly with lower primary incisor tooth interproximal decay. However, an article by Kidd44 stretches the boundaries of options for management of caries in
primary teeth by suggesting the following:
•	No caries removal, but opening the lesion to allow for
cleaning (as above)
•	Sealing techniques with no caries removal (the Hall
technique)
•	Partial caries removal and restoration (the atraumatic
restorative technique)
•	Complete caries removal and restoration
•	Not restoring or opening the tooth, but leaving it
as is
  

Chapter 11

The Hall technique involves restoration of nonpulpally–involved, significantly decayed primary molars
with stainless steel crowns luted with glass-ionomer cement, but without caries removal. While preliminary
studies45 seem optimistic, this technique remains controversial, raises concerns such as gingival health around the
crowns, and begs the need for prospective, randomized,
controlled clinical trials.

REFERENCES
1.	American Academy of Pediatric Dentistry: Reference Manual
35:06, Chicago, 2012-2013, AAPD pp 226–234.
2.	Berg JH: The continuum of restorative materials in pediatric
dentistry: a review for the clinician, Pediatr Dent 20:93–100,
1998.
3.	Bonilla E, White SN: Fatigue of resin-bonded amalgam restorations, Oper Dent 21:122–126, 1996.
4.	Mahler DB, et al.: One-year clinical evaluation of bonded
amalgam restorations, J Am Dent Assoc 127:345–349, 1996.
5.	Heise AL: Time required in rubber dam placement, J Dent
Child 38:116–117, 1971.
6.	Croll TP: Restorative dentistry for preschool children, Dent
Clin North Am 39:737–770, 1995.
7.	Collette J, Wilson S, Sullivan D: A study of the Isolite system
during sealant placement: efficacy and patient acceptance,
Pediatr Dent 32:146–150, 2010.
8.	Suwatviroj P, et al.: The effects of cavity preparation and lamination on bond strength and fracture of tooth-colored restorations in primary molars, Pediatr Dent 25(6):534–540, 2003.
9.	Croll TP: Lateral-access class II restoration using resin-modified
glass-ionomer or silver-cermet cement, Quintessence Int 26:
121–126, 1995.
10.	Vaikuntam J: Resin-modified glass ionomer cements (RM
GICs): implications for use in pediatric dentistry, J Dent Child
64:131–134, 1997.
11.	Marks LA, et al.: Dyract versus Tytin class II restorations
in primary molars: 36 months evaluation, Caries Res 33:
387–392, 1999.
12.	Welbury RR, et al.: Clinical evaluation of paired compomer
and glass ionomer restorations in primary molars: final results after 42 months, Br Dent J 189:93–97, 2000.
13.	Hubel S, Mejàre I: Conventional versus resin-modified glassionomer cement for class II restorations in primary molars. A
3-year clinical study, Int J Paediatr Dent 13:2–8, 2003.
14.	Paquette DE, et al.: Modified cavity preparations for composite
resins in primary molars, Pediatr Dent 5:246–251, 1983.
15.	Oldenburg TR, Vann Jr WF, Dilley DC: Composite restorations for primary molars: two-year results, Pediatr Dent 7:
96–103, 1985.
16.	Tonn EM, Ryge G: Two-year clinical evaluation of lightcured composite resin restorations in primary molars, J Am
Dent Assoc 111:44–48, 1985.
17.	Dilley DC, et al.: Time required for placement of composite versus amalgam restorations, J Dent Child 57:177–183,
1990.
18.	Donly KJ, et al.: Clinical performance and caries inhibition
of resin-modified glass ionomer cement and amalgam restorations, J Am Dent Assoc 130:1459–1466, 1999.
19.	dos Santos MPA, et al.: A randomized trial of resin-based restorations in class I and class II beveled preparations in primary molars, J Am Dent Assoc 140(2):156–166, 2009.
20.	Ekstrand KR, Bakhshandeh A, Martignon S: Treatment of
proximal superficial caries lesions on primary molar teeth
with resin infiltration and fluoride varnish only: efficacy after 1 year, Caries Res 44:41–46, 2010.

n

Restorative Dentistry

205

21.	Myer-Lueckel H, Bitter K, Paris S: Randomized controlled
clinical trial on proximal caries infiltration: three-year followup, Caries Res 46:544–548, 2012.
22.	Martignon S, et al.: Infiltrating/sealing proximal caries lesions: a 3-year randomized clinical trial, J Dent Res 91(3):
288–292, 2012.
23.	Trairatvorakul C, Piwat S: Comparative clinical evaluation
of slot versus dovetail class III composite restorations in primary anterior teeth, J Clin Pediatr Dent 28(2):125–130, 2004.
24.	McEvoy SA: A modified class III cavity preparation and composite resin filling technique for primary incisors, Dent Clin
North Am 28:145–155, 1984.
25.	MacLean JK, et al.: Clinical outcomes for primary anterior
teeth treated with preveneered stainless steel crowns, Pediatr
Dent 29(5):377–381, 2007.
26.	Croll TP: Primary incisor restoration using resin-veneered
stainless steel crowns, J Dent Child 65:89–95, 1998.
27.	Webber DL, et al.: A method of restoring primary anterior
teeth with the aid of a celluloid crown form and composite
resins, Pediatr Dent 1:244–246, 1979.
28.	Kupietzky A, et al.: Long-term photographic and radiographic assessment of bonded resin composite strip crowns
for primary incisors: results after 3 years, Pediatr Dent 27(3):
221–225, 2005.
29.	Roberson TM, et al.: Sturdevant’s art & science of operative dentistry, ed 5, St. Louis, 2006, Mosby.
30.	Radcliffe RM, Cullen CL: Preservation of future options: restorative procedures on first permanent molars in children,
J Dent Child 58:104–108, 1991.
31.	Humphrey WP: Uses of chrome steel in children’s dentistry,
Dent Surv 26:945–949, 1950.
32.	Randall RC: Preformed metal crowns for primary and permanent molar teeth: review of the literature, Pediatr Dent
24:489–500, 2002.
33.	Seale NS: The use of stainless steel crowns, Pediatr Dent
24:501–505, 2002.
34.	Spedding RH: Two principles for improving the adaptation
of stainless steel crowns to primary molars, Dent Clin North
Am 28:157–175, 1984.
35.	Mink JR, Hill CJ: Modification of the stainless steel crown for
primary teeth, J Dent Child 38:61–69, 1971.
36.	Yilmaz Y, Kocogullari ME: Clinical evaluation of two different methods of stainless steel esthetic crowns, J Dent Child
(Chic) 71(3):212–214, 2004.
37.	Jung YS, et al.: A study on the in-vitro wear of the natural
tooth structure by opposing zirconia or dental porcelain,
J Adv Prosthodont 2:111–115, 2010.
38.	Aron VO: Porcelain veneers for primary incisors: a case report, Quintessence Int 26:455–457, 1995.
39.	Faunce FR, Faunce AR: The use of laminate veneers for restoration of fractured or discolored teeth, Tex Dent J 93(8):6–7, 1975.
40.	Lee JG, et al.: Bonding strengths of etched porcelain discs and
three different bonding agents, J Dent Child 53:409–414, 1986.
41.	Nixon RL: Masking severely tetracycline-stained teeth with
ceramic laminate veneers, Pract Periodontics Aesthet Dent
8:227–235, 1996.
42.	Hjertton PM, Bagesund M: Er:YAG laser or high-speed bur
for cavity preparation in adolescents, Acta Odontol Scand
71:610–615, 2013.
43.	Olivi G, Margolis FS, Genovese MD: Pediatric laser dentistry,
a user’s guide, Chicago, 2011, Quintessence Publishing Co.,
Inc.
44.	Kidd E: Should deciduous teeth be restored? Reflections of a
cariologist, Dent Update 39:159–166, 2012.
45.	Innes NPT, Evans DJP: Modern approaches to caries management of the primary dentition, Br Dent J 214(11):559–566,
2013.

CHAPTER

12

Dental Materials
s Jeffrey A. Platt

For additional resources, please visit the

website.

CHAPTER OUTLINE
REGULATORY CONSIDERATIONS
THE TOOTH-RESTORATION
INTERFACE
TREATMENT OF THE CAVITY
PREPARATION
TEMPORARY AND PERMANENT
RESTORATIONS
RESTORATIVE RESINS
Conventional Composites
Microfilled Composites
Hybrid Composites

Light-Cured Composites
Posterior Composite Restoration
Resin Inlays
Dental Adhesives
AMALGAM
Selection of the Alloy
High-Copper Alloys
Mercury/Alloy Ratio
Trituration
Mechanical Amalgamators
Condensation

REGULATORY CONSIDERATIONS
Providing surgical therapy for initial and recurrent caries
remains an integral part of the pediatric dental practice.
Because the incidence of caries is not declining in some
segments of our population and in conjunction with the
restorative challenges involved with trauma cases and developmental defects, the demand for high-quality restorative materials remains strong. The global desire to see
the reduction and potential elimination of dental amalgam
continues to stimulate improvement of more aesthetic restorative options. However, material fracture, solubility,
dimensional change, and discoloration continue to plague
many of the composite materials in use today. Furthermore, some public concern remains about the potential
negative biological impact of resin monomers.
The development of materials to meet the challenging needs of restorative dentistry is accomplished under
the guidance of a series of standards that provide thresholds for different properties considered to be important
for clinical success. These standards have become international in scope, providing more global consistency
for the profession. The standards are often used to show
suitability for the marketplace when marketing approval
is sought from the Food and Drug Administration in
the United States or from similar organizations in other
countries.
Sidebar: The organizations that govern materials property standards in the United States. Other countries have similar
entities.
American Dental Association (ADA) Council on Scientific Affairs
ADA Standards Committee on Dental Products
American National Standards Institute
International Standards Organization (ISO)
206

Moisture
Marginal Breakdown and Bulk
Fracture
Bonded Amalgam Restorations
Mercury Toxicity
CERAMICS
CEMENTS
Luting Cements

Concerns about infection control and ease of delivery
have resulted in many materials being supplied in unit
dose packaging. Eliminating bulk packaging has greatly
reduced chairside disinfection concerns.
Another area of concern involves the safety of individuals working with restorative materials. The Occupational
Safety and Health Administration is responsible for developing and enforcing standards deemed necessary to ensure
workplace safety. Most countries have similar oversight
entities. Many dental materials contain hazardous materials and create a risk for an adverse biological response.
Material Safety Data Sheets are supplied by manufacturers and provide important precautionary information to
minimize exposure risks and treatment guidance for inappropriate exposures. The American Dental Association
provides a Regulatory Compliance Manual to assist the dentist/owner in meeting regulatory requirements.

THE TOOTH-RESTORATION INTERFACE
A critical component in the success of an “ideal” restorative
material involves the control of leakage that occurs along
the tooth-restoration interface. Multiple investigations
seem to indicate that the presence of a clinically intact interface can prevent the progression of caries. Maintaining
a sealed interface is challenged by the oral environment.
Sidebar: Some factors affecting tooth-restoration interface
stability.
Changes in temperature
Mechanical stress
Cariogenic biofilms
Poor material adaptation during placement
Loss of interface integrity and subsequent microleakage may be the precursors of secondary caries, marginal

Chapter 12

discoloration, postoperative sensitivity, and pulp pathology. Microleakage poses a particular concern for teeth
in the pediatric patient, because the floor of the cavity
preparation may be close to the pulp. The added insult
to the pulp caused by the seepage of irritants that penetrate around the restoration and through the thin layer
of dentin, or a microscopic pulpal exposure, may produce irreversible pulp damage. There is a lack of strong
evidence that microleakage laboratory testing correlates
with clinical performance of materials. However, there is
significant clinical evidence that providing a good seal inhibits caries progression under a restoration. This makes
the formation of a good tooth-restoration interface a significant concern.
One approach to bonding substances together is entirely mechanical. A liquid adhesive is used that will flow
into and then solidify in irregularities in the bonding surfaces. In dentistry, acid etching is commonly used to accomplish bonding of a restorative resin to enamel by the
formation of resin tags in the etched enamel.
For true adhesion to occur, bonding takes place at a
molecular level and involves a chemical interaction between the molecules of the adhesive and the solid surface.
Dental materials that are based on polyacrylic and other
polyalkenoic acids, such as the glass-ionomer cements,
are current examples of this potential for true adhesion
to tooth structure and have an established clinical record
of success.
Although advancements have been made in surface
chemistry and the development of adhesives for all types
of unusual applications, dental substrates remain a difficult challenge. Tooth structure possesses numerous undesirable characteristics as a substrate for bonding of an
adhesive. It is rough, inhomogeneous in composition,
covered with a tenacious layer of surface debris, and wet.
These factors discourage adhesion. Furthermore, the reactivity (surface energy) of enamel and dentin is fairly low,
and therefore the surface does not easily attract other molecules. When fluoride is included in the mineral structure
of the tooth, the surface energy is further reduced.
On the other hand, the surface energy of most restorative materials, particularly metallic ones, is higher than
that of normal intact tooth structure. Therefore debris accumulates on the surfaces of restorations more than on
the adjoining enamel. In addition, biofilms form readily
on methacrylate-based materials. This could contribute
to the high incidence of secondary caries associated with
most restorative materials. Debris accumulation can promote marginal deterioration by the loss of tooth structure
or restorative material at the interface. Such deterioration
would be expected to increase microleakage and its associated negative outcomes.
Marginal leakage has been a more acute problem with
resins than with any other restorative material. Amalgam
restorations tend to counteract the microleakage phenomenon by the formation of corrosion products along
the tooth-restoration interface. Other restorative materials may provide a mechanism for resisting secondary
caries attributable to microleakage, such as the fluoride
released from glass-ionomer cement (GIC). With most
direct restorative resins, however, there is no inherent

n

Dental Materials

207

resistance to the dangers of marginal penetration of deleterious agents. Thus the dentist will find it difficult to
maintain good adaptation of the resin restoration material to the tooth surface under oral conditions.

TREATMENT OF THE CAVITY
PREPARATION
Various materials have been advocated for use on the cavity preparation prior to placement of the final restoration.
In preparations that do not approach the pulp, the method of cavity surface preparation is dependent upon the final restorative material. For resin composite restorations,
the preparation is treated with a dental adhesive prior to
placement of the restorative material. For glass-ionomer
restorations, the smear layer is removed with a polyacrylic
acid-based dentin conditioner, followed by placement of
the glass-ionomer material directly onto the dentin.
When the preparation approaches the pulp tissue, a
hard-setting calcium hydroxide formulation has long
been used as a therapeutic aid associated with dentin
bridge formation between the material and remaining
vital pulp tissue. When placed directly on the pulp, this
material causes necrosis of the superficial pulp tissue, followed by odontoblast activity and subsequent dentin formation. Early versions of calcium hydroxide liners were
very susceptible to dissolution and had poor mechanical
properties. Newer versions have been improved, but calcium hydroxide does not seal the dentin. Glass-ionomer
cement or resin-modified glass-ionomer cement liners
have been placed over calcium hydroxide to provide a
level of protection from future bacterial penetration. Dental adhesives used with resin composite restorations can
provide this protection, more predictably when the restoration margins are all in enamel.
Newer approaches to pulp-capping and pulpotomy
methodologies include the use of materials containing
calcium silicate and calcium aluminate. Mineral trioxide
aggregate (MTA) is a mixture of dicalcium and tricalcium
silicates, tricalcium aluminate, gypsum, and tetracalcium
aluminoferrite. Calcium silicates have been modified
with light-activated resins to form lining materials with
enhanced dentin interaction when compared with that
of calcium hydroxide.

TEMPORARY AND PERMANENT
RESTORATIONS
The temporary restoration should possess good biological characteristics; have minimal solubility; and be rigid,
strong, and resistant to abrasion. The relative importance
of each of these properties depends on the degree of
permanence desired. For example, in the caries-affected
mouth, it is often desirable to remove some or all of the
caries immediately and place temporary restorations
which are subsequently replaced with more permanent
restorative materials. In such situations the temporary restoration may need to serve for several months or longer.
Strength and resistance to abrasion and dissolution are
of paramount importance in these cases. In most cases,
however, temporary restorations need to remain in place

208

Chapter 12

n

Dental Materials

only for days. For short-duration restorations, emphasis
may be placed on the biological properties when the restorative material is selected.
For intermediate restorations, zinc oxide–eugenol cement has been commonly used because of its excellent
tissue tolerance and ability to minimize initial microleakage. The strength, rigidity, and resistance to abrasion of
the conventional zinc oxide–eugenol mixture have been
improved by the addition of polymers and by the surface
treatment of the zinc oxide powder.
Type II GICs or the newer resin-modified GICs are also
useful as long-term, temporary restoratives—for example,
in the restoration of eroded areas in teeth with exposed
areas of cementum and dentin. Because of its desirable
biological and adhesive characteristics, GICs can be used
to restore these lesions without the need for a retentive
cavity preparation. If conventional GICs are used as restorative materials, they must be protected from exposure
to moisture in the early stages of setting and from dehydration for a very long time, preferably the entire time the
restoration will serve. In general, a resin-modified glass
ionomer is a better choice, for reasons given previously.
GIC formulations that include enhanced filler composition to improve their mechanical properties have
higher viscosity and are advocated for atraumatic restorative treatment applications and for class I and class II
restorations in the primary dentition. Improvements in
the mechanical properties of these “reinforced” GICs
have shown promise in some clinical trials. Whether their
mechanical properties, such as fracture toughness, are adequate to resist masticatory stress for long periods of time
is yet to be shown.

RESTORATIVE RESINS
CONVENTIONAL COMPOSITES
The term composite material refers to a multiphase material with a distinct interface separating the components.
When properly constructed, the combination of materials
results in properties that could not be obtained with any
of the components alone. (Examples of natural composites are bone, tooth enamel, and wood.) In a resin composite dental restorative material, inorganic filler is added
to a resin (organic) matrix in such a way that the properties of the matrix have been improved.
Several filler characteristics have a pronounced influence on the ultimate composite properties. The shape,
size, orientation, concentration, and distribution of the
filler are very important. The filler size has been used as
one method of classifying these materials (Table 12-1).
Likewise, the composition of the resin matrix has a
significant impact on the properties. The resin matrix
of most of the currently available composite materials is
based on combinations of bisphenol A–glycidyldimethacrylate (bis-GMA), urethane dimethacrylate, and triethylene glycol dimethacrylate, which is a low-viscosity
resin added as a diluent. Among the materials used for
macrofillers are ground particles of fused silica; crystalline
quartz; and soft glasses such as barium, strontium, and
zirconium silicate glass. These particles, which make up

Table 12-1
Classification of Direct Restorative Resin
Composites
By Filler Size and
Content

By Use or
Characteristic

By Activation
Mechanism

Hybrid
Microhybrid
Microfill
Nanohybrid
Nanocomposite

Multipurpose
Bulk-fill
Flowable
Core
Provisional

Light-cured
Chemically cured
Dual-cured

Figure 12-1 Schematic drawing of a conventional compos-

ite resin with macrofiller (black areas) before and after finishing or wear. (Redrawn from Phillips RW: Science of dental
materials, ed 9, Philadelphia, 1991, WB Saunders.)

70% to 80% of the material by weight of multipurpose
composites, enhance the physical and mechanical properties of the material. When compared with an unfilled
acrylic resin, the composite resins demonstrate increased
stiffness and hardness, a reduced coefficient of thermal
expansion, and reduced polymerization shrinkage.
The filler and the resin matrix may be chemically
bonded together with a coupling agent on the surface of
the filler. If this bonding is not accomplished, the particles may be easily dislodged, water sorption at the fillermatrix interface may take place, and stress transfer between
matrix and filler may not occur. The filler particles are
coated with a reactive silane product. Despite use of this
coupling system, the filler particles do become dislodged
during cutting and finishing and under abrasive action
such as toothbrushing or occlusal contact. This abrasive
action likely affects the softer resin matrix, which can
erode and expose the filler particles. When enough of the
filler particle is exposed, it will break free of the resin. This
process continually leaves a rough surface (Figs. 12-1 and
12-2). Because the composites are 70% to 80% filled, this
surface roughness is clinically noticeable.

Chapter 12

n

Dental Materials

209

Figure 12-3 Structure of a microfilled resin showing microFigure 12-2 Scanning electron micrograph showing gener-

alized wear of a packable composite exposing the enamel
margin.

Based on clinical experience, there has been a definite
preference for use of smaller filler particles. In the early
resin composites, it was common for the particle size to
approach 100 μm; now the coarsest particles would not
exceed 30 μm. The average mean particle size of the fillers
in conventional composites is in the 8- to 12-μm range.
So-called nanohybrid composites and nanocomposites
contain fillers as small as 0.002 μm.

MICROFILLED COMPOSITES
Efforts to improve the surface smoothness and polishability
of composite resins led to the development of the microfilled composite. These composites are based on the use of
an extremely small silica filler particle, whose size is from
0.02 to 0.04 μm; hence they are called microfine, microfilled, or polishable resins. The particles may be dispensed
directly into the paste, but the amount that can be added in
this manner is very limited. Addition of amounts in excess
of 20% results in a paste too viscous for the dentist to use.
Matrix resin monomer can be heavily filled with microfine silica and polymerized in the manufacturing process. The resulting composite is ground to filler particle
sizes comparable with those of the inorganic filler in conventional composite. This “organic” filler with additional
colloidal silica is then added to the resin monomer to
form the composite resin paste. The structure of such a
resin is illustrated in Figure 12-3.
The appealing characteristic of these microfilled resins
is their ability to be finished to an extremely smooth surface, which was a major problem with the conventional
composites. When microfilled resins are finished, the
polymerized resin filler particles cut at the same rate as
the matrix, which results in a much smoother surface, as
shown in Figure 12-3. Even if some of the very small silica
particles are dislodged, the surface irregularities cannot be
detected visually.

filler (dots) and prepolymerized macrofiller particles before
and after being finished. (Redrawn from Phillips RW: Science
of dental materials, ed 9, Philadelphia, 1991, WB Saunders.)

Because of the small silica particle size, the filler has a
very large surface area, and the total amount of filler that
can be incorporated is reduced to about 50% by weight
compared with a filler loading of 70% to 80% for conventional composites. Thus the microfilled composite has
higher resin matrix content. As a result, such resins are
softer and have a slightly higher coefficient of thermal expansion, higher water absorption, more polymerization
shrinkage, and somewhat lower mechanical properties.
Because of this tradeoff in properties, microfilled resins
should be used where aesthetics is the principal consideration and where undue stress will not be placed on the
restoration, such as in class III or class V restorations.
When the restoration is subject to stress, such as the incisal margin of a class IV restoration, a composite having
better physical properties is preferred. The development
of different types of hybrid composites has significantly
reduced the use of microfilled composites.

HYBRID COMPOSITES
The conventional macrofilled composite is no longer in
common use. Filler sizes have been continuously reduced
to approach the surface smoothness of the microfilled
resin but retain the filler levels and physical properties of
the conventional composite. Hybrid composites are a recent step toward smaller particle size. They contain radiopaque glass particles with an average size of 0.6 to 1.0 μm
in addition to 10% to 20% colloidal silica. The total filler
level is significantly higher than in a microfill resin, at
70% to 80%. Because these combine two types of fillers,
the result is called a hybrid composite.
Although the surfaces of hybrid resins are not as
smooth as those of microfilled resins, these resins find extensive anterior use if they are carefully polished. In addition, one of the primary motivations in the development
of these hybrid materials was to find a material that could
compare favorably with dental amalgam in wear resistance in class I and II restorations. (The use of composites

210

Chapter 12

n

Dental Materials

in such situations is discussed in the section on posterior
composite restorations.) The most recent trend in resin
composites has been the marketing of multipurpose restorative materials for use in either anterior or posterior
applications.
Flowable composites have become popular for small
restorations and are used as liners. Filler content is decreased or matrix monomers changed to decrease the viscosity of the resin composite. This generally comes with
a sacrifice of mechanical properties. Some flowable composites are marketed for use as pit-and-fissure sealants.
Nanoparticles are now included in the nanocomposite and nanohybrid composite materials. These particles
range from 0.002 μm to 0.075 μm and are formed from
sols of silica or zirconia. It is apparent that much of this
size range was present in the microfill resins, making the
nomenclature somewhat misleading. However, the improved filler manufacturing techniques have resulted in
filler levels approaching 80% for these materials. Their
polishability and relatively good mechanical properties
have made them popular clinical choices for many
applications.

LIGHT-CURED COMPOSITES
Originally, composite resins were chemically activated,
which required the mechanical mixing of two pastes to
initiate the chemical reaction. Light-cured or light-activated
composites have largely supplanted the chemically activated
composites. Light-activated resins do not differ significantly in composition from the chemically activated
resins except for the polymerization activation mechanism. However, light curing provides an advantage in
working time and other handling characteristics. The
dentist has complete control over the working time
and is not confined to the rather short working time
of the chemically activated systems. This is particularly
bene­ficial when large restorations such as class IV restorations are placed.
Most currently available visible light-cured resins
contain the photosensitive initiator camphorquinone,
which absorbs visible light at wavelengths between 450
and 500 nm (blue light) and forms free radicals that
activate an amine accelerator. Because of the yellow
color of camphorquinone, other photoinitiators, such
as phenylpropanedione and 2,4,6-trimethylbenzoyldiphenylphosphine oxide, have also been used in some
lighter-shade composites.
One major disadvantage of light-cured composites
must be emphasized. Polymerization will occur only if
the resin is exposed to light of sufficient intensity for an
adequate length of time. The top surface of a restoration,
which is nearly in direct contact with the light source,
will always be cured if the light and resin are serviceable.
However, the curing of the portion of the restoration
farthest removed from the light is less certain. Normally
this portion of the restoration is not accessible for any
kind of probing to test its hardness. If the cure is incomplete on the bottom side of the resin compared with the
top surface, the physical properties will be reduced and a
color shift may occur in time. Likewise, unpolymerized
monomer may increase the potential for pulpal irritation.

Microleakage is another potential scenario. For maximum
polymerization to be ensured, the end of the light source
should be within 1 mm of the surface of the resin and
the depth of resin to be cured should not exceed 2.5 mm.
Furthermore, the curing time should match the manufacturer’s recommendation for the type of light unit and
resin shade. Larger restorations and dark shades of resin
require an incremental placement technique.
Dual-activated resins are available that combine both
light and chemical activation. In situations in which light
access to parts of the restoration is problematic, a dualactivated material may be preferred. Bulk-fill composites
have recently been introduced that provide a 4- to 5-mm
depth of cure through the use of highly sensitive photoinitiators or very light resin shades.
Sidebar: Light-curing technique.
Position the patient for maximum control
Stabilize the light guide during the curing cycle
Be sure the end of the light guide is clean and not damaged
Begin the polymerization with the guide about 1 mm
away from the resin surface
After 1 second, move the guide as close to the resin
surface as possible
Wear eye protection to allow for visual monitoring of
the curing cycle
When visible light-curing systems were first introduced into dentistry, considerable emphasis was placed
on the claim that the light output of the unit remained
constant with use, unlike the previously used ultraviolet
light units. Unfortunately this statement is only partially
true. Numerous factors do influence the light output of a
visible light-curing unit, such as power line variations, aging of the filters, aging of the lamp, damage to the lightconducting pipe or optic fiber, and resin buildup on the
end of the light tip. Many visible light activation units
have built-in meters to verify adequate light intensity. Inexpensive meters are available for this purpose and should
be used regularly. If such a device is not available, a simple curing light usage test should be performed to ensure
adequate light intensity. Place a mass of light-curing resin
that is about the thickness of a nickel over a Mylar matrix
strip on a sheet of white paper. Cover this mass with a
Mylar matrix strip. Holding the curing light within 1 mm
of the top surface, cure the resin for the length of time
normally used. Remove the Mylar matrix strips and probe
both the top and bottom resin surfaces with an explorer.
There should be no noticeable difference in hardness or
scratch resistance. Dark shades of composite resin may
require longer curing times or curing of a thinner layer
according to the manufacturer’s instructions. If a comparable cure on both top and bottom cannot be achieved,
the combination of resin and curing light is unsatisfactory for clinical use.
The original visible light activation units incorporated
a quartz-tungsten-halogen (QTH) lamp as a light source.
This light is filtered to retain the wavelengths between 400
and 500 nm (blue light). In an effort to accomplish more
rapid polymerization of a greater thickness of resin, manufacturers have marketed other light sources, such as plasma
arc lamps and lasers. Both are significantly more expensive

Chapter 12

than the QTH units, and there is evidence that more rapid polymerization may increase polymerization shrinkage stresses at the tooth-resin interface. A popular type
of activation unit uses blue light–emitting diodes (LED).
LEDs are nearly 100% efficient at generating light over a
relatively narrow wavelength band (often from 460 to 480
nm). The diodes are commonly made of indium, gallium,
and nitride. Variations in concentrations of these elements
within the diode can shift the spectral output of the light,
and some lights now contain multiple diodes. These lights
are often self-contained, rechargeable, battery-powered activation lights that generate less heat than QTH units do.
(More than 95% of the electrical energy delivered to a QTH
light becomes heat and light at wavelengths longer than
500 nm.) Unlike QTH lamps, an LED should maintain a
constant output throughout its lifetime. High output LED
units can provide enough energy to burn tissue and should
not be held against mucosa for long periods of time.
The total power delivered in the 400- to 500-nm band
from LED lights was initially much lower than that of
QTH units. Recently marketed LED lights have significantly improved power output, and the useful light intensity for some LED units exceeds that of the best QTH
units. A significant advantage of the LED lights appears to
be convenience because they do not require a power cord
fixed to a base unit (Fig. 12-4). Because of the risk of retinal damage to the operator, protective glasses or shields
are recommended to protect the eyes from the glare of
the intense blue light produced by visible-spectrum curing lights.

POSTERIOR COMPOSITE RESTORATION
Composite resins were originally used for anterior or
non–stress-bearing locations such as class III, IV, and V
restorations. They are now widely used for class I and II
restorations. Early attempts with conventional macrofilled composites failed because of unacceptable wear on
the occlusal surface. Only in the case of conservative restorations in primary dentition was any success observed.
A major goal of composite resin research has been to develop properties adequate for use as alternatives to dental
amalgam.
The improved strength, hardness, and modulus of elasticity of newer composite resins, with their low thermal

Figure 12-4 Rechargeable battery-powered light-emitting-

diode–type visible light activation unit.

n

Dental Materials

211

conductivity and superior aesthetics, indicate that they
may serve in the restoration of occlusal and proximal surfaces in posterior teeth (class I and II restorations). Extensive
clinical testing has been done to compare the performance
of these new resins with that of amalgam. Resin composites now exist with documented clinical wear of less than
20 μm/yr over a 5-year period. The patient and guardian
should be cautioned that the performance of these restorations over long periods (5 to 10 years or longer) should be
monitored for wear and occlusal relationships.
The dentist needs to be aware of two additional factors
when choosing resin composites for posterior occlusal
service. Although the microleakage problems with anterior composite restorations have been significantly reduced
by the development of the acid-etch enamel-bonding
technique (discussed later), posterior class II restorations
often have gingival margins in dentin or cementum. Furthermore, the class II restoration presents a proximal surface with poor, if any, direct access to the curing light. (As
mentioned under the heading “Light-Cured Composite”
earlier in this chapter, exposure to light of adequate intensity is essential to cure a light-cured composite.) Various solutions have been suggested, including the use of
light-conducting interproximal wedges. Probably the best
general procedures are to utilize incremental buildup and
pay careful attention to the light-curing technique.
Another problem with posterior restorations is related
to the curing shrinkage pattern. Most composite resins
exhibit linear shrinkage of 2% or more during curing. The
light-cured composite hardens first on the surface immediately adjacent to the curing light tip. As a consequence,
the direction of shrinkage is toward the curing light and
well-bonded interfaces and away from the floor of the
preparation or the gingival margin. This places the largest stresses from curing shrinkage on the sections of resin
that are the least well-cured and whose bond to tooth
structure may be the poorest. Increased microleakage may
be the result. Recent developments have resulted in the
marketing of new resin matrix systems with very low polymerization shrinkage. Analysis of laboratory data shows
that these materials minimize polymerization stresses at
the resin interface. The use of liners with a lower modulus
of elasticity also reduces these stresses. Long-term clinical
data, however, are not available to fully substantiate the
importance of these laboratory observations.
Resin composites are greatly compromised by moisture
contamination during placement, so effective isolation of
the operative field is essential. Operative techniques as described in Chapter 11 can reduce this risk.
Knowledge about the safety of composite resins is important. A resin monomer often used in restorative resin composites is bis-GMA. This monomer is the reaction product
of bisphenol A and a dimethacrylate. Bisphenol A is chemically similar to synthetic estrogen. Because of this, concerns have been raised about the potential for promoting
certain types of malignancies. Complete conversion of the
bisphenol A during the synthesis of bis-GMA resin monomers does not occur, and very small trace amounts can be
found in dental composites. Although bisphenol A is commonly used in many commercial polymers for nondental
uses, certain jurisdictions, including the State of California,

212

Chapter 12

n

Dental Materials

have promulgated severe restrictions on its use in food or
drink containers and, in particular, in resin baby bottles.
Components used in the light activation of polymerization
initiation are very reactive. Traces of these components remain after the resin has hardened. Moreover, enzymes in
saliva and in oral tissues may promote degradation of dental resins, which could release reactive species. It is important that the dental consumer, who may be the parent of a
pediatric patient, be aware of the risks and benefits of the
dental materials used in a proposed treatment plan.
The clinical application of pit-and-fissure sealants
is discussed in a separate chapter; however, some comments about these materials are relevant to the discussion
of light-activated resin composites. Clinicians often tend
to assume that a sealant is so thin that if the surface is
hard, the material is properly polymerized. Cross-sections
through extracted molar teeth show that thicknesses exceeding 2 mm are common in occlusal pits. Deep developmental grooves may have exposed dentin at the bottom,
and if the bottom of the sealant is not adequately polymerized, the dentin is in contact with reactive components
of the resin. The geometry of the occlusal surface may
result in reduced light intensity because of the distance of
the tip from the occlusal grooves. Use of a large-diameter
curing tip further reduces the intensity. Opaque sealants
are popular, but the opacity also reduces the light transmitted to the bottom of the sealant. Adequate polymerization is a function of the energy delivered to the entire
mass of the resin. Radiant exposure is the product of light
intensity and the activation time. Good light-curing of
opaque sealants requires meticulous attention to detail.

RESIN INLAYS
Some of the shortcomings of composite resins, particularly the difficulties involving placement and light-curing
(discussed previously), can be minimized with the use
of direct or indirect resin inlay restorations. The indirect
inlay restoration is fabricated in the laboratory on a die
poured from an impression of the prepared tooth—similar
to a wax pattern for a cast restoration—whereas the direct resin inlay is fabricated in the operatory. In the latter
instance a separating medium is applied to the prepared
tooth prior to the placement and light-curing of the resin. Then the direct inlay is removed from the mouth and
subjected to additional curing procedures. Finally the finished inlay is cemented in the mouth with resin cement.
Both techniques allow better access for light-curing the
composite, and the finished restoration can be subjected
to additional curing under intense light, heat, pressure,
or some combination of these. In theory the properties of
the resulting composite are maximized, and the presence
of unreacted monomer is minimized. More importantly
the polymerization shrinkage occurs outside the mouth.
The stresses at the tooth-restoration interface should be
much lower than in direct-placement resin restorations.

DENTAL ADHESIVES
Enamel Bonding
The acid-etch technique is one of the most satisfactory
methods for mechanical bonding of resin to enamel. First,
the enamel is etched with a solution of phosphoric acid

(usually about 35%) for approximately 15 to 20 seconds.
Gels, created by the addition of colloidal silica or polymer
beads to the acid, result in a material that is more easily
handled during placement.
The next critical step in the technique is the use of a
water rinse to remove the debris produced during etching. If this debris is not flushed off the enamel surface, the
resin will not wet the etched surface. A minimum wash
time of 30 seconds is usually recommended. If an enamel
adhesive or pit-and-fissure sealant is being placed, the
etched surface must be dried for at least 15 seconds before
the resin is placed.
Any film of moisture on this cleaned surface will inhibit resin penetration into the etched enamel. If the surface
is accidentally contaminated by saliva, the salivary film
cannot be completely removed by being washed. Rather the surface should be re-etched for 10 seconds, then
washed and dried.
An etched enamel surface is shown in Figure 12-5, A.
The acid cleans the enamel to provide better wetting of the
resin and creates pores into which the resin flows to produce “tags” that greatly increase retention (see Fig. 12-5, B).
The resulting bond should reduce the possibility of marginal staining, which is the invariable result of microleakage. In addition to providing a seal between the resin and
tooth, the acid-etch technique results in mechanical retention. Resin shear bond strengths to etched enamel range
from 16 to 22 MPa.

Dentin Bonding
As an adjunct to the acid-etch technique, manufacturers
formerly supplied enamel-bonding agents. The bonding
agent consisted of bis-GMA resin matrix material diluted
with a low-viscosity methacrylate monomer. After the
enamel was acid-etched the bonding agent was applied.
The composite resin was then immediately inserted, and
it in turn bonded to the intermediate layer of the resinbonding agent. The resulting bond to tooth structure was
strictly mechanical. Some orthodontic bonding resins
and pit-and-fissure sealants resemble these early bonding
agents.
Providing successful bonding to dentin has gone
through multiple generations of development. Early efforts to etch dentin and apply enamel-bonding agents
were not successful. The structure of dentin is far more
complex, and it has a lower concentration of inorganic
material. Because of the microstructural organization of
dentin, the regular etch patterns seen with enamel are not
produced. Due to the organic component of dentin and
the permeability that results from the dentinal tubules,
the dentin surface has low surface energy and is constantly wet. This presents the ultimate challenge for adhesion.
For many years research has focused on the development
of agents that will bond adhesively to dentin. This has led
to the introduction of dentin-bonding agents, which are
either chemically activated or light-cured. They are applied to the dentin before placement of the composite.
The chemistry of the different products is complex
and varied. Some agents rely on mechanical retention,
whereas there is some evidence that others form chemical
bonds to the organic or inorganic portions of the dentin.

Chapter 12

n

Dental Materials

213

A

B
Figure 12-5 Effects of acid etching. A, Scanning electron micrograph of enamel surface etched with phosphoric acid. B, Scanning
electron micrograph of resin tags formed by penetration of resin into etched enamel surface (5000x). (A and B from Anusavice
KJ: Phillips’ Science of dental materials, ed 11, St. Louis, 2003, WB Saunders; courtesy of K.J. Söderholm.)

However, little convincing evidence exists that, as a whole,
the dentin-bonding agents currently marketed form significant chemical bonds to dentin. It is more likely that
the primary bonding mechanism is micromechanical.
Performance is often asserted by reports of bond strengths
to dentin. Tensile bond strengths appear to provide better
clinical relevance than shear bond strengths. Often the
bond strengths measured in vitro decrease markedly with
time, exposure to water, and thermocycling. The presence
of matrix metalloproteinases and collagenases in etched
dentin appears to contribute to bond degradation.
Sidebar: Types of Dental Adhesives.
Etch-and-rinse, 3-step
Etch-and-rinse, 2-step
Self-etch, 2-step
Self-etch, 1-step
Self-etch, universal
Glass-ionomer cement

The dentin-bonding systems that first exhibited good
bond strengths involved removal of the dentin smear layer and decalcification of the outer layer of intact dentin
with an acid. A hydrophilic primer component carried by
a volatile solvent that displaces water was then applied.
This resulted in creation of a so-called hybrid layer between the intact dentin and the resin adhesive because
resin components in the primer penetrate the decalcified
dentin, reacting with and modifying the remaining dentin structure. High in vitro bond strengths are generally
reported for these systems, along with good short-term
clinical performance. Unlike the enamel-bonding acidetch technique, when systems with hydrophilic primers
are used, it is important that the etched dentin surface
not be desiccated before application of the primer.
Current advances have focused on the development of
delivery systems that simplify the steps involved in the
use of dentin-bonding systems. Acidic primers that are

214

Chapter 12

n

Dental Materials

self-etching have been introduced. These simultaneously
demineralize and penetrate the smear layer and underlying dentin. Other systems combine the primer and the
resin adhesive into one component. These simplified systems mix the acidic primer and resin adhesive before they
are placed on the tooth surface. Even though these newer
systems use fewer separate components, their application still requires that several steps be performed with
great attention to detail. Use of these materials remains
extremely technique-sensitive. The status of these agents
remains controversial, particularly with regard to their
long-term stability in the oral cavity. Until these matters
are resolved, it would be prudent not to deviate too far
from accepted restorative procedures. One should assume
that the dentin adhesive will not eliminate the need for
the use of traditional methods for retention of the resin
restoration, such as acid-etching of the enamel and retentive cavity preparations in dentin or cementum.
Analysis of laboratory data has shown incompatibility between some of the newer dental bonding systems
and restorative resins or resin cements that are activated
by chemical or dual means. Many of the resins used for
crown buildup as core materials fall into these categories.
It appears that the use of acidic primers may interfere
with the chemical activation of these resin materials unless a separate resin adhesive is placed over the primer
and light-activated before the core material or cement is
placed. The simplified adhesive systems are also relatively
hydrophilic and act as a permeable membrane, allowing
water to move through the adhesive layer and interfere
with the bond to the overlying resin, particularly if curing
is delayed.
Current dental adhesives are to be used with both
dentin and enamel. Bond strengths reported for etched
enamel usually equal those for the original enamelbonding agents that have largely disappeared. Regardless of whether an auxiliary resin-bonding agent is used,
adequate etching of the enamel is an important step in
securing mechanical bonding of any restorative resin to
enamel. Some of the systems that use self-etching primers or acids other than phosphoric acid do not routinely
yield enamel-bond strengths as high as expected with
conventional acid-etching. Questions exist about the effectiveness of dental bonding systems with self-etching
primers when these are used in place of phosphoric acid
treatment for bonding orthodontic appliances and pitand-fissure sealing.
Conventional phosphoric acid etchants can be used to
ensure etching of the enamel margins of a cavity preparation. This selective etching technique has led to a new
group of adhesives called universal adhesives. These materials are intended for use on all tooth structures, whether or not phosphoric acid has been applied. Some of these
adhesives also include active molecules for interaction
with ceramic and metallic surfaces.
In the context of dental bonding, one should not
ignore the polyacrylic acid systems. GIC has been recommended as a dentin-bonding agent in the so-called
sandwich technique. Fast-setting GICs are available
as cavity-lining materials (type III GIC and light-cured
GIC). The enamel is not covered with GIC; rather, it is

acid-etched in the conventional manner. A resin-bonding
agent is then applied and a composite resin placed. The
ionomer bonds adhesively to the tooth, whereas the
bonding agent bonds mechanically to the ionomer and
the enamel. This adds yet another dimension to dentinbonding technology, particularly for class II restorations.
Dental resins are no more or less irritating to the pulp
than are several other commonly used restorative materials. Whenever the cavity preparation is deep, the same
precautions should be taken with resins as with other restorative materials.

AMALGAM
Controversy regarding the safety of the dental amalgam
restoration has existed since the material was introduced
to the profession more than 150 years ago. Periodically
this controversy surfaces in the news media and becomes
a matter for public and professional debate. In 2012 the
inclusion of dental amalgam in the United Nations Environment Program Mercury Treaty brought heightened
awareness to dentistry’s impact on the environment. As
a result, the dentist who uses dental amalgam can expect
questions to be raised by patients and their guardians and
can expect requests for replacement of intact amalgam
restorations with other materials.
Amalgam is no longer the most commonly used material for restoring posterior caries lesions. Tooth-colored
restorative materials are increasingly being used. The popularity of dental amalgam likely will continue to decline
as these other materials demonstrate their longevity and
their suitability as general amalgam replacements in the
permanent dentition.
The unique clinical success of amalgam during 150
years of use has been associated with many characteristics.
It is likely that its excellent clinical service, even under adverse conditions, is related to the tendency for its microleakage to decrease as the restoration ages in the oral cavity.
Although amalgam does not bond to tooth structure, and
the margins of an amalgam restoration may appear open,
the restoration-tooth interface immediately below the exposed margin becomes filled with relatively insoluble corrosion products that inhibit leakage. Amalgam is unique
from this standpoint. The microleakage around other restorative materials usually increases with time. Amalgam
is the least technique-sensitive of all current direct restorative materials. Another unique property of amalgam as
a direct filling material is its lack of dimensional change
during hardening. The ADA specification for dental amalgam limits maximum acceptable dimensional change to
± 0.2%. If this is compared with a common value of 2% or
higher for the polymerization shrinkage of a resin matrix
composite material, the potential impact on microleakage
is obvious.
Nevertheless, failures of amalgam restorations are observed. These may occur in the form of recurrent caries,
fracture (either gross or severe marginal breakdown), dimensional change, or involvement of the pulp or periodontal membrane. More significant than the type of
failure is its cause. Two factors that lead to such clinical
failures are improper design of the prepared cavity and

Chapter 12

faulty manipulation. In other words, the deterioration of
amalgam restorations can often be associated with the clinician’s neglect in observing the fundamental principles
of cavity design or abuse in preparing and inserting the
material. Another factor involved is the choice of the
alloy used.

SELECTION OF THE ALLOY
Several criteria are involved in the selection of an amalgam alloy. The first criterion is that the alloy should meet
the requirements of ADA Specification No. 1 or ISO Specification 24234.
The manipulative characteristics of dental amalgam
are extremely important and a matter of subjective preference. Rate of hardening, smoothness of the mix, and
ease of condensation and finishing vary with the alloy.
For example, the resistance felt with lathe-cut amalgams
during condensation is entirely different from that with
spherical amalgams. The alloy selected must be one with
which the dentist feels comfortable because the operator
variable is a major factor influencing the clinical lifetime
of the restoration. Use of alloys and techniques that encourage standardization in the manipulation and placement of the amalgam enhances the quality of the service
rendered. Coincident with this is the delivery system provided by the manufacturer—its convenience, expediency,
and ability to reduce human variables.
Obviously, the physical properties should be reviewed
in the light of claims made for the superiority of one alloy
over competing products. Ideally such a list of properties
should be accompanied by documented clinical performance in the form of well-controlled clinical studies.
Although the cost of the alloy is a factor, this criterion
should not be overemphasized when balanced against
the alloy’s ability to render maximum clinical service.
The dentist should always consider the fractional costs
of any material compared with the overall total charges
for a dental procedure when making price comparisons
among brands, particularly when comparing a brand with
documented clinical performance against a generic brand
of material.
Dental amalgam alloys generally are available as either
small filings called lathe-cut alloys or spherical particles
called spherical alloys. Spherical alloys tend to amalgamate readily. Therefore amalgamation can be accomplished
with smaller amounts of mercury than required for lathecut alloys, and the material gains strength more rapidly.
Also, the condensation pressure and technique used by
the dentist in placing the restoration are somewhat less
critical in achieving the same properties of the amalgam.
This is an advantage in difficult clinical situations in
which optimal access for condensation is limited. Spherical amalgam alloys have a somewhat different feel during
condensation and require less condensation pressure than
do lathe-cut alloys. The dentist and auxiliary personnel
should familiarize themselves with the handling characteristics of a new alloy before placing clinical restorations.

HIGH-COPPER ALLOYS
The original dental amalgam alloys were of silver and
tin with a maximum of 6% copper. When significantly

n

Dental Materials

215

more copper is available, improved laboratory properties
and clinical performance have been demonstrated. This
improvement has been attributed to the displacement of
the tin-mercury reaction product with a copper-tin phase
during the amalgamation reaction. Alloys that contain
enough copper to eliminate the formation of the tinmercury phase (from 11% to 30%) are called high-copper
amalgam alloys. The first such alloy of this type was an
admixed system. Small spherical particles of a silver-copper alloy were added to filings of a conventional silver-tin
alloy. High-copper alloys can also be made with singlecomposition particles. Each of these alloy particles has
the same chemical composition, usually silver, copper,
and tin. Amalgams made from high-copper alloys have
low creep. Creep is the tendency of a material to deform
continuously under a constant applied stress and has
been associated with the marginal breakdown (ditching)
of amalgam restorations. Creep of modern high-copper
amalgam alloys is less than 1%. Choice of amalgam alloy
today should be limited to high-copper alloy systems.
Regardless of the alloy used, manipulation plays a vital
role in controlling the properties and the clinical performance of the restoration.

MERCURY/ALLOY RATIO
Most of the properties of amalgam restorations have been
shown to depend on the relative amount of mercury contained in the finished restoration (the residual mercury).
One variable that controls the final mercury content is
the amount of mercury required to mix the amalgam.
Amalgam alloy is sold in the form of prefilled, disposable mixing capsules containing the proper amounts of
alloy and mercury. This delivery system provides several
advantages. The alloy/mercury ratio is accurately preproportioned. The need for disinfection procedures is minimized because the capsule system is discarded after use.
Most importantly, exposure of dental personnel and environmental contamination by mercury vapor are minimized. These prefilled capsules are usually available for
mixes of different sizes, often called single- or double-spill
capsules.

TRITURATION
The second manipulative variable that controls the residual mercury content is trituration. Trituration time
can significantly influence both consistency and working
time of the mixed amalgam. These in turn relate to the
ability to bring excess mercury to the surface during condensation. The correct trituration time varies depending
on the composition of the alloy, the mercury/alloy ratio,
the size of mix, and other factors. The best practice is to
acquire an appreciation for the appearance of a proper
mix and then to adjust the trituration time accordingly.
The most serious error in amalgamation is generally undertrituration. An undertriturated mix appears dry and
sandy and does not cohere into a single mass. Such an
amalgam will set too rapidly, which results in high residual mercury content, reduced strength, and the increased
likelihood of fracture or marginal breakdown. Properly
mixed amalgam is a shiny, coherent mass that can be
readily removed from the capsule.

216

Chapter 12

n

Dental Materials

MECHANICAL AMALGAMATORS

MOISTURE

When first introduced, mechanical amalgamators for
dental amalgam operated at a single speed that was usually below 3000 cpm. High-copper alloys in prefilled,
self-activating capsules are designed for shorter trituration times at higher trituration speeds. Failure to activate
these capsules reliably results in undertrituration and is
a common problem with the use of older single-speed
amalgama­
tors. Because amalgamators also deteriorate
with time, replacement of an older unit with a new highspeed amalgamator is desirable. A unit that allows multiple speeds of operation should be selected because numerous other products such as dental cements are now marketed in capsules to be mixed in a dental amalgamator.
The trituration times suggested by the amalgam alloy
supplier are starting points. Amalgamators may vary in
operating speed even within the same brand, and a unit’s
performance may vary with line voltage or the number
of times it is used in rapid succession. Trituration speed
and time significantly influences the rate at which some
amalgams harden (Fig. 12-6).

Moisture contamination of an amalgam restoration can
promote failure. If zinc is present in the alloy, it will react with water, and hydrogen gas will be formed. As this
gas builds up within the amalgam, a significant delayed
expansion can occur and may cause protrusion of the
amalgam from the cavity preparation, which enhances
the possibility of fracture at the margins.
Such moisture contamination can result from failure
to maintain a dry field during the placement of the restoration. Exposure to saliva after the amalgam has been
completely condensed is not harmful. It is only moisture
incorporated within the amalgam as it is being prepared
or inserted that must be avoided.
Zinc-free alloys are available, and their physical properties are generally comparable with those of their zinccontaining counterparts. A zinc-free, high-copper alloy
should be used when the dentist operates in a field where
moisture control is difficult.

CONDENSATION

Because dental amalgam is a brittle material, a commonly observed type of amalgam failure is the restoration in
which the marginal areas have become severely chipped.
The exact mechanisms that produce this breakdown of
the amalgam or the adjoining tooth structure are not established, but it is likely that the deterioration is precipitated by manipulation and the finishing technique rather
than by dimensional changes during setting.
If the restoration is improperly finished by the dentist,
a thin ledge of amalgam may be left that extends slightly
over the enamel at the margins. These thin edges of such a
brittle material cannot support the forces of mastication.
In time they fracture, leaving an opening at the margins.
Bulk fracture of amalgam is much less common with
high-copper amalgam alloys. Those cases that do occur
likely have one of two causes. Poor cavity design resulting in an insufficient bulk of material across the isthmus
can lead to failure of even a high-strength alloy, as illustrated in Figure 12-7. The other reason for bulk fracture is

The purpose of condensation is to adapt the amalgam
to the walls of the cavity preparation as closely as possible, to minimize the formation of internal voids, and
to express excess mercury from the amalgam. Within reasonable limits, the greater the condensation pressure, the
lower the amount of residual mercury left in the restoration and the greater the strength of the restoration. The
selection of the condenser and the technique of “building” the amalgam should be designed to achieve those
objectives, as described in detail in textbooks of operative
dentistry, and should be tailored to the handling characteristics of the type of amalgam alloy chosen.

MARGINAL BREAKDOWN AND BULK FRACTURE

Figure 12-6 The influence of amalgamator speed (low-

medium-high) on the hardening rate of a high-copper
amalgam alloy, as measured by the Brinell hardness number
(BHN). BHN = 1.0 indicates the working time, and BHN
= 4.5 indicates the carving time. (Redrawn from Brackett
W. Master’s thesis. Indianapolis, 1986, Indiana University
School of Dentistry.)

Figure 12-7 Bulk fracture of an amalgam restoration. Such

failure may occur from improper cavity design or premature
occlusal loading.

Chapter 12

premature loading of the restoration. Unlike a resin matrix composite, amalgam gains strength slowly over the
first 24 hours. Premature loading can result in minute
fractures that are not apparent for weeks or even months.
The use of a rapid-setting amalgam with a high 1-hour
compressive strength should be considered during the
treatment of a pediatric patient in whom compliance
with instructions to refrain from biting down hard on the
freshly placed amalgam is in question.

BONDED AMALGAM RESTORATIONS
Because dental amalgam does not adhere to tooth structure, it must be retained mechanically by the design of
the cavity preparation and/or mechanical devices such as
pins. The placement of an amalgam does not strengthen
the compromised remaining tooth structure, and subsequent fracture may occur, particularly in molar teeth
with relatively large mesio-disto-occlusal amalgam restorations. The use of dental adhesive systems, as described
in detail in the section related to resin composites, as
lining materials for amalgam to create a “bonded amalgam restoration” has been suggested. Several products are
marketed specifically for this purpose. In general, they
are chemically activated dentin-bonding systems over
which the amalgam is condensed before the resin adhesive has hardened. This results in an intermixing of the
unset resin and the plastic amalgam at the interface and
forms a mechanical bond as both materials harden. It is
important to distinguish this application from the use of
a dental adhesive to seal the dentin surface and reduce
early microleakage as previously discussed. When dental
adhesives are used to seal the dentin surface, the adhesive
should be polymerized before the amalgam is placed.
Bond strengths reported in laboratory studies between
amalgam and dentin are lower than the maximum reported for resin composite bonded to dentin. In vitro studies
also show that teeth restored with bonded amalgams are
more resistant to fracture than those in which amalgam
is placed without a bonding adhesive. These are relatively
short-term laboratory studies. Even though longer-term
clinical data are available, little is known about the potential influence of embedding the resin into the bulk of
the amalgam on the long-term properties of the restoration. At present, amalgam bonding should be considered
only as an adjunct for conventional, accepted practices of
cavity preparation and mechanical retention of amalgam.

MERCURY TOXICITY
The amalgam restoration is possible only because of the
unique characteristics of mercury. Mixing this liquid metal with the alloy powder provides a plastic mass that can
be inserted into the tooth and then hardens rapidly to a
structure that resists the rigors of the oral environment.
As the restoration hardens, mercury reacts with silver
and tin to form stable, intermetallic compounds. Most of
the public controversy about the safety of dental amalgam has focused on the hazards associated with elemental mercury and some of its organic compounds. Many
substances commonly regarded as quite safe contain extremely dangerous elemental ingredients. No one would
ever consider human ingestion of elemental sodium or

n

Dental Materials

217

chlorine, but ordinary table salt, which is the compound
sodium chloride, is an important dietary substance. From
the time of the earliest use of amalgam, it has been asked
whether mercury in a dental restoration can produce local
or systemic toxic effects in humans. It is periodically conjectured that mercury toxicity from dental restorations is
the cause for numerous illnesses of unknown etiology.
The possibility of toxic reactions by the patient to traces of mercury penetrating the tooth or sensitization from
mercury dissolving from the surface of the amalgam is
remote. The danger has been evaluated in numerous studies. The patient’s encounter with mercury vapor during
insertion of the restoration is brief, and the total amount
of mercury vapor is small. Furthermore, the amount of
mercury released from the amalgam in service is small
compared with that released from other sources of mercury from air, water, and food. Metallic mercury in the human digestive track is apparently not converted to lethal
organo-mercury compounds and is excreted by the body.
Both the National Institutes of Health and the FDA
have examined the evidence for risk of dental restorative
materials to the patient. The conclusion was that, except
for the very small fraction of the population with a true
allergic reaction to mercury or other constituents of amalgam, the dental amalgam restoration remains a safe and
effective treatment. No evidence was found that related
the presence of amalgam restorations to disorders such
as arthritis, multiple sclerosis, or other diseases in which
amalgam has been implicated. It should be noted that no
currently available restorative material is completely riskfree, and that patients should be informed of the relative
risks associated with all dental treatment alternatives.
The question about the replacement of existing serviceable amalgams with other materials remains one of
professional judgment. Both the ADA and some state
dental licensing boards have found that a dentist who
recommends replacement of amalgam restorations
with other materials based on the claim that this will
improve the physical health of the patient may be acting unethically and may be subject to sanctions by licensing bodies and to suits for civil damages. Patients
who believe that they have medical problems related to
the presence of any dental restorative material should
be referred to a physician for diagnosis and treatment
recommendations.
What about dental office personnel? Restorative dentists and their office personnel are potentially exposed
daily to mercury, even in offices in which amalgam restorations are not being placed. Although metallic mercury can be absorbed through the skin or by ingestion,
the primary risk to dental personnel is from inhalation.
A potential hazard exists for both the dentist and the
staff from long-term inhalation of mercury vapor in the
dental clinic, although the few actual incidents reported
have been related to poor mercury-handling technique.
The maximum level considered safe for occupational exposure is 0.1 mg of inorganic mercury per cubic meter of
air averaged over a standard 8-hour workday. Mercury at
room temperature has a vapor pressure almost 400 times
the maximum level considered safe. This vapor has no
color, odor, or taste and cannot be readily detected by

218

Chapter 12

n

Dental Materials

simple means at the level of maximum safe exposure.
Because liquid mercury is almost 14 times more dense
than water, a small spill can be significant. Eliminating
the use of bulk mercury by the use of prefilled, disposable capsules significantly reduces exposure to mercury
vapor.
The dental operatory should be well ventilated. All
mercury waste and amalgam scrap removed during the
placement or removal of amalgam restorations should
be collected and stored in well-sealed containers. When
amalgam is cut, water spray and high-speed evacuation
should be used. More detailed recommendations can be
obtained from the Regulatory Compliance Manual published by the ADA. The risk to dental personnel from mercury exposure cannot be ignored. However, adherence to
simple hygienic procedures will ensure a safe working environment.
Waste materials containing mercury or amalgam scrap
should be disposed of responsibly in accordance with the
regulations of the local Environmental Protection Agency. These materials should not be incinerated or subjected to heat sterilization. Biologically contaminated wastes
containing mercury, including extracted teeth, should
be cold sterilized with a chemical agent before disposal.
The most significant threat to the continued use of dental
amalgam will likely be from government regulations on
environmental waste discharge. In Japan use of amalgam
has been discontinued because it is not feasible for a dental office using amalgam to meet restrictions on mercury
discharge into sewers. Amalgam-mercury separators on
dental clinic wastewater discharge lines are now required
in several countries in Europe and are considered best
practice by the American Dental Association. Local and
state authorities should be consulted about limitations on
the discharge of mercury into wastewater from a dental
practice.

CERAMICS
Increased demands for aesthetic restorations and the encouraging performance of all-ceramic restorations in the
permanent dentition have led to significant advances in
dental ceramics. Glass ceramics used in all-ceramic restorations now provide highly aesthetic results, but their
relatively low mechanical properties and brittle nature
prohibit their predictable use in high-stress applications
unless supported by a high-strength substrate. Polycrystalline ceramics, such as yttria-stabilized zirconia, are
marketed for use as all-ceramic preformed crowns in pediatric applications. Because of the brittle nature of the
material, these crowns cannot be crimped or adapted to
a preparation. Retention is largely dependent on bonding to the preparation. Further evidence is needed to understand the clinical importance of this new treatment
option.

CEMENTS
LUTING CEMENTS
Cements are used for luting applications and as restorative materials. Luting cements are used to fill the space

between the tooth structure and restorations or a
­ ppli­ances
made outside of the mouth. Restorative applications of
cements include temporary and permanent restorations
and bases under other restorative materials. In addition,
at least one cement is used as a pit-and-fissure sealant. The
fundamental chemistry of the two groups of cements is
similar. Changes are made in formulation to enhance the
viscosity of luting cements and the strength of restorative
cements.
Sidebar: Cements with Pediatric Interest.
Zinc Oxide–Eugenol
Polycarboxylate
Glass Ionomer
Resin-Modified Glass Ionomer
Self-Adhesive Resin
Resin
Different applications are associated with different
requirements for luting cements. When an indirect restoration such as a stainless steel crown is luted, the ideal
characteristics of the cement would include low solubility, the ability to bond to tooth structure, and enough
strength to resist dislodgement during function. When
an orthodontic band that needs to be retrieved at some
point is luted, the cement needs to be weak enough to be
broken during band removal and must be easily cleansed
from the tooth surface. Zinc phosphate cement was used
historically for broad application. It finds very little use in
today’s pediatric practice.
Restorative cements are of lower strength than other
direct restorative materials. This limits their use to temporary and low-stress permanent applications.

Zinc Oxide–Eugenol
The acid-base reaction between zinc oxide and eugenol
results in a cement that can be used as both a luting and a
restorative material. Because of its low strength and high
oral solubility, zinc oxide–eugenol is not recommended
as a permanent luting cement. However, because of its
exceptionally kind biological behavior, it is often used as
a base material, as a temporary luting cement, and as a
temporary restorative material. Eugenol is an inhibitor
for addition-polymerization resins and can interfere with
subsequent use of resin cements, restorative materials,
and even some impression materials.

Zinc Phosphate Cement
Formerly, zinc phosphate cement was the most widely
used luting agent. Composed essentially of phosphoric
acid liquid that is mixed with zinc oxide powder, the cement has excellent handling characteristics such as setting time, fluidity, and film thickness. Furthermore, this
type of cement has a long history of successful applications for permanent cementation. It does not have an
anticariogenic effect, does not adhere to tooth structure,
and does demonstrate a moderate degree of intraoral
­solubility.
Because of the phosphoric acid liquid, zinc phosphate
cement is an irritant, and proper pulp protection is recommended. When experience indicates that sensitivity
and pulp response are likely to be problems, the use of cement that is more biologically compatible, such as polycarboxylate cement, is recommended.

Chapter 12

Polycarboxylate Cement
When zinc polycarboxylate cement is used, the bond occurs
between the carboxylic acid groups in the liquid polyacrylic
acid and the calcium in the tooth structure. The powder of
the cement is essentially zinc oxide. This cement continues
to maintain some presence in the marketplace because it
offers good biocompatibility with pulp tissue.
Because the ultimate properties are affected by c­ hanges
in the water content of the liquid, the cement liquid
should not be dispensed until just before the mix is to occur. Increases in the powder/liquid ratio make the cement
less adherent to the tooth; decreases in the ratio result in
increased solubility. The powder is quickly added to the
liquid and the mix completed within 30 seconds. If the
surface of the cement is not glossy in appearance, the mix
should be discarded and a new one prepared. The gloss is
an indicator of the presence of the carboxylic acid groups
required for cement-tooth bonding.

Glass-Ionomer Cement
Glass-ionomer cement (GIC) is another type of cement
that is based on polyacrylic acid. Type 1 GIC is used for
luting applications. Because of their fluoride release and
potential for adherence to the calcium in the tooth, GIC
formulations have been prepared for use as restorative materials (type II) and as base and liner materials (type III).
Like zinc polycarboxylate cement, the glass-ionomer liquid is a polyacrylic or other alkenoic acid, such as itaconic or
maleic, with tartaric acid added to improve handling properties. The acid has the potential for bonding to calcium in
the manner described for polycarboxylate. This chemical
bond provides retention of the cement to the tooth.
The powder is a fluoroaluminosilicate glass and displays fluoride release patterns that change over time.
Analysis of data from glass-ionomer restorations of class V
erosion lesions for periods of more than 7 years indicates
that GIC shows resistance to secondary caries. The desirability of the GIC system should be readily apparent: it
has a potential for adherence to tooth structure and possesses anticariogenic potential.
The material is supplied as a powder and liquid and is
commonly preproportioned in a disposable capsule to be
mixed in an amalgamator. With type I GIC, the liquid acid
may be freeze-dried and combined in the powder. When
this powder is mixed with water, the acid reconstitutes,
which results in the same setting reaction. The freeze-dried
products have better shelf life and somewhat lower viscosity, which are important characteristics for luting cements.
The mix can be made either on a disposable, moistureresistant paper pad or on a glass slab. For minimal contamination of the mix from abraded metal, a plastic spatula is
preferred to a metal one. As with polycarboxylate cement,
the polyacrylic-acid–based liquid is not dispensed until
just before the start of the mix. GICs are mixed in a manner similar to polycarboxylate cements: large increments
of the powder are rapidly incorporated into the liquid, and
the mix should be completed within 40 seconds. The working time is short, usually no more than 3 minutes from the
start of the mix. If the mix has lost its gloss or a skin has
formed on the surface, the material should be discarded.
After setting, the material is more brittle than polycarboxylate cement. It can be trimmed and finished in

n

Dental Materials

219

much the same manner as zinc phosphate cement. Before
the patient is dismissed, all the accessible margins should
be covered with the varnish or protective resin supplied
by the manufacturer. This protects the cement from oral
fluids and dehydration during the next few hours as the
setting reaction continues.
Instances of postoperative sensitivity have been reported when GIC is used as a luting agent, particularly in deep
preparations with minimal remaining dentin. This is possibly attributable to the low initial pH of the cement and
its relatively slow set. As a guard against potential irritation, a liner such as calcium hydroxide should be placed
in very deep areas. The cut dentin surface can be cleaned
mechanically with pumice, but the smear layer should
not be removed. After being cleaned the dentin should
be rinsed and dried but not desiccated. A slightly damp
surface appears to help minimize sensitivity and does not
interfere with the setting reaction.
Glass-ionomer luting cements have lower intraoral solubility and mechanical properties similar to those of zinc
phosphate cements. Because of their potential for fluoride
release and adhesion to tooth structure, they have been
popular for the luting of metallic restorations.
In addition to its use as a luting agent for metallic restorations, GIC has been used for luting orthodontic bands
to posterior teeth and for bonding orthodontic brackets
to acid-etched enamel. GIC has cohesive strength lower
than that of the resin orthodontic adhesives, but the fluoride release from GIC should minimize the white spotting
and decalcification sometimes seen around orthodontic
brackets or bands.

Resin-Modified Glass-Ionomer Cements
Resin monomers have been added to GIC to make resinmodified GIC. These cements, also referred to as hybrid glass
ionomers or light-cured glass ionomers, are created by the addition of resin monomers or a co-monomer of acrylic acid and
a methacrylate such as hydroxyethyl methacrylate to the
glass-ionomer formulation. The known disadvantages of
conventional glass ionomers (short working time, slow development of ultimate properties, sensitivity to both moisture exposure and dehydration during setting, and, when
compared with resin cements, lower cohesive strength)
have been largely addressed in the resin-modified GIC. The
resin component hardens immediately on exposure to the
light, which results in an initial set of the cement. The material then continues to undergo the acid-base GIC setting reaction that occurs more slowly than that of a conventional
GIC, resulting in a much longer working time for the resinmodified glass ionomer. The rapid set after light exposure
yields a material that is much less sensitive to dehydration
or moisture. Type I resin-modified GIC luting cements have
gained wide acceptance when used with metallic restorations; in this case the resin component is either chemically
activated or dual-activated (chemically and light). Resinmodified GIC type II restorative materials appear to exhibit
the advantages of conventional GIC and have gained in
popularity because they facilitate decreased treatment times.

Resin Cements
Derived from the composite resin systems used for restorative materials, resin luting cements may be viewed as

220

Chapter 12

n

Dental Materials

lightly filled composites. The resin matrix systems used
are the same as, or closely related to, those used for restorative resins. Although these materials are not new
to dentistry, they are becoming more extensively used.
Their first major clinical application was in direct bonding of orthodontic attachments to acid-etched enamel, for
which they quickly became the materials of choice. Similar formulations were developed with pit-and-fissure sealants, which are discussed in Chapter 10. The resin-bonded
bridge, such as the “Maryland” bridge, is another application in which resin cements came to the forefront. The
demand for dentistry has resulted in extensive use of both
resin and ceramic veneers. Here, too, resin cements are the
cements of choice. In addition, new technology for fabricating all-ceramic crowns and inlays has greatly increased
the use of these restorations. Because resin cements have
high strength, low film thickness, very low oral solubility, and can be bonded to etched enamel, ceramics, resins,
and etched or treated metal surfaces, they are the cements
of choice for veneers and all-ceramic crowns. With the advent of dentin adhesives, resin cements provide the possibility of bonded, indirect restorations.
Resin cements are usually available in different shades
for color matching beneath translucent restorations, and
opaque cements are made for masking metal substructure
or discolored tooth structure. The first resin cements were
two-component, chemically activated curing systems. Visible light–activated, single-component systems are now
available and are popular when used with translucent
restorative materials. Dual-activated materials, which are
both chemically and light-activated, are recommended
for use beneath thick restorations and in locations where
geometry may limit access to the curing light.
Self-adhesive resin cements have become popular
choices for luting applications. In principle, these materials are similar to the self-etch dental adhesives. They are
acidic, do not require a separate adhesive, and form a thin
hybrid layer with dentin as they polymerize. As a group,
these materials do not have the same level of mechanical
properties as traditional resin cements.

SUGGESTED READINGS
General
Anusavice KJ: Phillips’ science of dental materials, ed 12, Philadelphia,
2013, WB Saunders.
O’Brien WJ: Dental materials and their selection, ed 4, Chicago,
2008, Quintessence Publishing.
Sakaguchi RL, Powers JM: Craig’s restorative dental materials, ed
13, Philadelphia, 2012, Elsevier Mosby.

Adhesion
Buonocore MG: The use of adhesives in dentistry, Springfield, IL,
1975, Charles C. Thomas.
Garcia-Godoy F, Donly KJ: Dentin/enamel adhesives in pediatric
dentistry, Pediatr Dent 24:462–464, 2002.
Gerdolle DA, Mortier E, Droz D: Microleakage and polymerization
shrinkage of various polymer restorative materials,
J Dent Child 75:125–133, 2008.
Heintze SD: Clinical relevance of tests on bond strength, microleakage and marginal adaptation, Dent Mater 29:59–84, 2013.
Heintze SD, Ruffieux C, Rousson V: Clinical performance of cervical restorations—a meta-analysis, Dent Mater 26:993–1000,
2010.

Mertz-Fairhurst EJ, et al.: Ultraconservative and cariostatic
sealed restorations: results at year 10, J Am Dent Assoc
129:55–66, 1998.
Peumans M, et al.: Clinical effectiveness of contemporary adhesives: a systematic review of current clinical trials, Dent Mater
21:864–881, 2005.
Van Meerbeek B, et al.: Relationship between bond-strength
tests and clinical outcomes, Dent Mater 26:e100–121, 2010.

Amalgam
Batchu H, et al.: Evaluating amalgam separators using an international standard, J Am Dent Assoc 137:999–1005, 2006.
Browning WD, Johnson WW, Gregory PN: Clinical performance
of bonded amalgam restorations at 42 months, J Am Dent
Assoc 131:607–611, 2000.
Mahler DB, Engle JH: Clinical evaluation of amalgam bonding in
Class I and II restorations, J Am Dent Assoc 131:39–43, 2000.
Mahler DB, et al.: Corrosion sealing of amalgam restorations
in vitro, Oper Dent 34:312–320, 2009.
Marshall GW, Marshall SJ, Letzel H: Mercury content of amalgam restorations, Gen Dent 37:473–477, 1989.
Osborne JW, Summitt JB, Roberts HW: The use of dental amalgam in pediatric dentistry: review of the literature, Pediatr
Dent 24:439–447, 2002.
Summit JB, et al.: The performance of bonded vs. pin-retained
complex amalgam restorations: a five-year clinical evaluation, J Am Dent Assoc 132:923–931, 2001.

Cements
Chadwick BL, Evans DJ: Restoration of class II cavities in
primary molar teeth with conventional and resin modified
glass ionomer cements: a systematic review of the literature,
Eur Arch Paediatr Dent 8:14–21, 2007.
Kloukos D, Pandis N, Eliades T: Bisphenol-A and residual monomer leaching from orthodontic adhesive resins and polycarbonate brackets: a systematic review, Am J Orthod Dentofacial
Orthop 143:S104–S112, 2013.
Mickenautsch S, Yengopal V: Caries-preventive effect of glass
ionomer and resin-based fissure sealants on permanent
teeth: an update of systematic review evidence, BMC Research
Notes 4:22, 2011.
Roberts HW, et al.: Mineral trioxide aggregate material use in
endodontic treatment: a review of the literature, Dent Mater
24:149–164, 2008.
Yengopal V, Mickenautsch S: Caries-preventive effect of resinmodified glass-ionomer cement (RM-GIC) versus composite
resin: a quantitative systematic review, Eur Arch Paediatr Dent
12:5–14, 2011.

Composites
Braga RR, Ballester RY, Ferracane JL: Factors involved in the development of polymerization shrinkage stress in resin-composites:
a systematic review, Dent Mater 21:962–970, 2005.
Bücher K, et al.: Longevity of composite restorations in patients with early childhood caries (ECC), Clin Oral Investig
18:775–782, 2014.
Margeas R: Versatile composite resins simplifying the practice of
restorative dentistry, Compend Contin Educ Dent 35:52–55,
2014.
Moore BK, et al.: Depth of cure of dental resin composites: ISO
4049 depth and microhardness of types of materials and
shades, Oper Dent 33:408–412, 2008.
Platt JA, Clark H, Moore BK: Curing of pit and fissure sealants using
light emitting diode curing units, Oper Dent 30:764–771, 2005.
Price RB, Shortall AC, Palin WM: Contemporary issues in light
curing, Oper Dent 39:4–14, 2014.
Toh SL, Messer LB: Evidence-based assessment of tooth-colored
restorations in proximal lesions of primary molars, Pediatr
Dent 29:8–15, 2007.

CHAPTER

13

Treatment of Deep Caries,
Vital Pulp Exposure, and
Pulpless Teeth
s Jeffrey A. Dean

For additional resources, please visit the

website.

CHAPTER OUTLINE
DIAGNOSTIC AIDS IN THE
SELECTION OF TEETH FOR VITAL
PULP THERAPY
History of Pain
Clinical Signs and Symptoms
Radiographic Interpretation
Pulp Testing
Physical Condition of the Patient
EVALUATION OF TREATMENT
PROGNOSIS BEFORE PULP
THERAPY
TREATMENT OF THE DEEP CARIES
LESION
Indirect Pulp Treatment (Gross
Caries Removal or Indirect Pulp
Therapy)

I

VITAL PULP EXPOSURE
Size of the Exposure and Pulpal
Hemorrhage
VITAL PULP THERAPY TECHNIQUES
Direct Pulp Capping
Pulpotomy
NONVITAL PULP TREATMENT WITH
IRREVERSIBLE PULPITIS OR
NECROTIC PULP
Pulpectomy
SUMMARY OF PULP THERAPY
RESTORATION OF THE PULPALLY
INVOLVED TOOTH
REACTION OF THE PULP TO VARIOUS
CAPPING MATERIALS
Zinc Oxide–Eugenol

t is well recognized that maintenance of the primary
teeth has many of the same goals as maintenance
of the permanent dentition. Primary teeth aid in
maintaining the integrity of the dental arch, thereby
preventing malocclusion, allowing for proper speech
and mastication, preventing aberrant tongue habits, and
providing esthetics.1 Primary teeth have the additional
goal of guiding the eruption of the permanent teeth.
Therefore treating primary teeth that have been afflicted
by disease or trauma is imperative. However, the treatment of the dental pulp exposed by the caries process,
by accident during cavity preparation, or even as a result
of injury and fracture of the tooth has long presented
a challenge. As early as 1756, Pfaff reported placing a
small piece of gold over a vital exposure in an attempt to
promote healing.
Although it has been established that the pulp is capable of healing, there is still much to learn regarding
the control of infection and inflammation in the vital pulp. Current methods of diagnosing the extent of
pulpal injury are inadequate. More effective methods
of pulp therapy are still needed, and more research is
necessary.

Calcium Hydroxide
Preparations Containing Formalin
Ferric Sulfate
Mineral Trioxide Aggregate
Other Capping Materials and
Methods
Summary of Pulp-Capping Materials
FAILURES AFTER VITAL PULP
THERAPY
Internal Resorption
Alveolar Abscess
EARLY EXFOLIATION OR
OVER-RETENTION OF PRIMARY
TEETH WITH PULP TREATMENTS

DIAGNOSTIC AIDS IN THE SELECTION
OF TEETH FOR VITAL PULP THERAPY
HISTORY OF PAIN
The history of either the presence or the absence of pain
may not be as reliable in the differential diagnosis of
the condition of the exposed primary pulp as it is in
permanent teeth. Degeneration of primary pulp even to
the point of abscess formation without the child recalling pain or discomfort is not uncommon. Nevertheless,
the history of a toothache should be the first consideration in the selection of teeth for vital pulp therapy. A
toothache coincident with or immediately after a meal
may not indicate extensive pulpal inflammation. The
pain may be caused by an accumulation of food within
a caries lesion, by pressure, or by a chemical irritation
to vital pulp protected by only a thin layer of intact
dentin.
A severe toothache at night usually signals extensive
degeneration of the pulp and calls for more than conservative pulp therapy. A spontaneous toothache of more
than momentary duration occurring at any time usually
221

222

Chapter 13

n

Treatment of Deep Caries, Vital Pulp Exposure, and Pulpless Teeth

means that pulpal disease has progressed too far for treatment, even with a pulpotomy.

CLINICAL SIGNS AND SYMPTOMS
A gingival abscess or draining fistula associated with a
tooth with a deep caries lesion is an obvious clinical sign
of an irreversibly diseased pulp. Such infections can be
resolved only by successful endodontic therapy or extraction of the tooth.
Abnormal tooth mobility is another clinical sign that
may indicate a severely diseased pulp. When such a tooth
is evaluated for mobility, the manipulation may elicit localized pain in the area, but this is not always the case.
If pain is absent or minimal during manipulation of the
diseased mobile tooth, the pulp is probably in a more advanced and chronic degenerative condition. Pathologic
mobility must be distinguished from normal mobility in
primary teeth near exfoliation.
Sensitivity to percussion or pressure is a clinical symptom suggestive of at least some degree of pulpal disease,
but the degenerative stage of the pulp is probably of the
acute inflammatory type. Tooth mobility or sensitivity
to percussion or pressure may be a clinical sign of other
dental problems as well, such as a high restoration or advanced periodontal disease. However, when this clinical
information is identified in a child and is associated with
a tooth having a deep caries lesion, the problem is most
likely to be caused by pulpal disease and possibly by inflammatory involvement of the periodontal ligament.

A

RADIOGRAPHIC INTERPRETATION
A recent x-ray film must be available to examine for evidence
of periradicular or periapical changes, such as thickening of
the periodontal ligament or rarefaction of the supporting
bone. These conditions almost always rule out treatment
other than an endodontic procedure or extraction of the
tooth. Radiographic interpretation is more difficult in children than in adults. The permanent teeth may have incompletely formed root ends, giving an impression of periapical
radiolucency, and the roots of the primary teeth undergoing
even normal physiologic resorption often present a misleading picture or one suggestive of pathologic change.
The proximity of caries lesions to the pulp cannot always be determined accurately in the x-ray film. What
often appears to be an intact barrier of secondary dentin
protecting the pulp may actually be a perforated mass of
irregularly calcified and carious material. The pulp beneath
this material may have extensive inflammation (Fig. 13-1).
Radiographic evidence of calcified masses within the pulp
chamber is diagnostically important. If the irritation to the
pulp is relatively mild and chronic, the pulp will respond
with inflammation and will attempt to eliminate the irritation by blocking (with irregular dentin) the tubules through
which the irritating factors are transmitted. If the irritation
is intense and acute, and if the caries lesion is developing
rapidly, the defense mechanism may not have a chance
to lay down the reparative dentin barrier, and the disease
process may reach the pulp. In this instance the pulp may
attempt to form a barrier at some distance from the exposure site. These calcified masses are sometimes evident
in the pulp horn or even in the region of the pulp canal

B
Figure 13-1 A, First primary molar appears to have an intact

dentinal barrier beneath the caries lesion. B, Histologic section shows a perforation of the barrier with necrotic material at the exposure site. There is advanced inflammation of
the pulp tissue, which is likely to evoke a spontaneous pain
response.

entrance. A histologic examination of these teeth shows
irregular, amorphous masses of calcified material that are
not like pulp stones (Fig. 13-2). The masses bear no resemblance to dentin or to a dentinal barrier and are always associated with advanced degenerative changes of the coronal
pulp and inflammation of the tissue in the canal.

Chapter 13

n

Treatment of Deep Caries, Vital Pulp Exposure, and Pulpless Teeth

CdS
photocell

223

Data
recorder

Optical fiber
Green
LED

A

Individual resin cap

Regulated
power supply

Figure 13-3 Schematic drawing of transmitted-light photo­

plethysmography. LED, light-emitting diode. (Adapted from
Miwa Z et al: Pulpal blood flow in vital and nonvital young
permanent teeth measured by transmitted-light photoplethysmography: a pilot study, Pediatr Dent 24:594-598,
2002.)

B
Figure 13-2 A, Calcified mass in the pulp chamber beneath

the exposure site is associated with extensive inflammation of the pulp in the coronal area and in the pulp canals.
B, The amorphous mass is surrounded by pulp tissue with
advanced inflammation.

PULP TESTING
Historically the value of the electric pulp test in determining the condition of the pulp of primary teeth has been
viewed as questionable. Although it will give an indication of whether the pulp is vital, the test does not provide
reliable evidence of the degree of pulpal inflammation. A
complicating factor is the occasional positive response to
the test in a tooth with a necrotic pulp if the content of
the canals is liquid. The reliability of the pulp test for the
young child can also be questioned sometimes because
of the child’s apprehension associated with the test itself.

Thermal tests also have reliability problems in the primary dentition. The lack of reliability is possibly related to
the young child’s inability to understand the tests. However, Hori and colleagues2 have found the electric pulp
test to be reliable in diagnosing the pulp status in primary
teeth. Comparing the electric pulp test with thermal testing, they found the highest accuracy for the former, followed by heat and then cold tests.
Several noninvasive techniques have been developed
and advocated for recording the blood flow in human
dental pulp. Two of these methods include the use of a
laser Doppler flowmeter and transmitted-light photoplethysmography. As shown in the schematic in Figure 13-3,
these methods essentially work by the transmission of a
laser or light beam through the crown of the tooth; the
signal is picked up on the other side of the tooth by an
optical fiber and photocell. A distinct advantage of this
technique is its noninvasive nature, particularly in comparison with electric pulp testing. Not only is there inaccuracy in the response of the pulp to electric stimuli but
also the electric pulp tester may elicit pain. Because the
testing may be uncomfortable for young patients, further
dental treatment may be affected. A study by Miwa and
colleagues suggested that the transmitted-light technique
can detect pulpal blood flow in young permanent teeth
and is thus applicable to the assessment of pulp vitality.3
Recent research has looked at the use of pulse oximetry
measured oxygen saturation levels of the dental pulp. Although the technique may not be ready for routine clinical use, it is a promising new area of study.

PHYSICAL CONDITION OF THE PATIENT
Although local observations are of extreme importance in
the selection of cases for vital pulp therapy, the dentist must
also consider the physical condition of the patient. In seriously ill children, extraction of the involved tooth after

224

Chapter 13

n

Treatment of Deep Caries, Vital Pulp Exposure, and Pulpless Teeth

proper premedication with antibiotics, rather than pulp
therapy, should be the treatment of choice. Children with
conditions that render them susceptible to subacute bacterial endocarditis or those with nephritis, leukemia, solid tumors, idiopathic cyclic neutropenia, or any condition that
causes cyclic or chronic depression of granulocyte and polymorphonuclear leukocyte counts should not be subjected
to the possibility of an acute infection resulting from failed
pulp therapy.4 Occasionally, pulp therapy for a tooth of a
chronically ill child may be justified, but only after careful
consideration is given to the prognosis of the child’s general condition, the prognosis of the endodontic therapy, and
the relative importance of retaining the involved tooth.

EVALUATION OF TREATMENT
PROGNOSIS BEFORE PULP THERAPY
The diagnostic process of selecting teeth that are good
candidates for vital pulp therapy has at least two dimensions. First, the dentist must decide that the tooth has a
good chance of responding favorably to the pulp therapy
procedure indicated. Second, the advisability of performing
the pulp therapy and restoring the tooth must be weighed
against extraction and space management. For example,
nothing is gained by successful pulp therapy if the crown
of the involved tooth is nonrestorable or the periodontal
structures are irreversibly diseased. By the same rationale,
a dentist is likely to invest more time and effort to save a
pulpally involved second primary molar in a 4-year-old
child with unerupted first permanent molars than to save a
pulpally involved first primary molar in an 8-year-old child.
Other factors to consider include the following:
  
1.	The level of patient and parent cooperation and motivation in receiving the treatment
2.	The level of patient and parent desire and motivation
in maintaining oral health and hygiene
3.	The caries activity of the patient and the overall prognosis of oral rehabilitation
4.	The stage of dental development of the patient
5.	The degree of difficulty anticipated in adequate performance of the pulp therapy (instrumentation) in
the particular case
6.	Space management issues resulting from previous
extractions, preexisting malocclusion, ankylosis, congenitally missing teeth, and space loss caused by the
extensive carious destruction of teeth and subsequent
drifting
7.	Excessive extrusion of the pulpally involved tooth
resulting from the absence of opposing teeth
  
These examples, in any combination, illustrate the
almost infinite number of treatment considerations that
could be important in an individual patient with pulpal
pathosis.

TREATMENT OF THE DEEP CARIES
LESION
Children and young adults who have not received early
and adequate dental care and optimal systemic fluoride
and do not have adequate oral hygiene often develop
deep caries lesions in the primary and permanent teeth.

Many of the lesions appear radiographically to be dangerously close to the pulp or to actually involve the dental
pulp. Approximately 75% of the teeth with deep caries
have been found from clinical observations to have pulpal exposures. Well over 90% of the asymptomatic teeth
with deep caries lesions can be successfully treated by indirect pulp therapy techniques, without pulp exposure.
This procedure is described herein.
If a carious exposure discovered at the time of the
initial caries excavation could be routinely treated with
consistently good results, a major problem in dentistry
would be solved. Unfortunately, the treatment of vital exposures, especially in primary teeth, has not been entirely
successful. Therefore clinicians prefer to avoid pulp exposure during the removal of deep caries whenever possible.

INDIRECT PULP TREATMENT (GROSS CARIES
REMOVAL OR INDIRECT PULP THERAPY)
The procedure in which only the gross caries is removed
from the lesion and the cavity is sealed for a time with
a biocompatible material is referred to as indirect pulp
treatment (Fig. 13-4). Indirect pulp treatment is not a new
procedure but has attracted renewed interest. Laboratory
studies and favorable clinical evidence justify its routine
use. Teeth with deep caries that are free of symptoms of
painful pulpitis are candidates for this procedure.
The clinical procedure involves removing the gross
caries but allowing sufficient caries to remain over the
pulp horn to avoid exposure of the pulp. The walls of the
cavity are extended to sound tooth structure because the
presence of carious enamel and dentin at the margins of
the cavity will prevent the establishment of an adequate
seal (extremely important) during the period of repair.
The remaining thin layer of caries at the base of the cavity
is covered with a radiopaque biocompatible base material
and sealed with a durable interim restoration (Fig. 13-5).
Some interim restorative materials may also serve as the
base material. While waiting 6 to 8 weeks for the placement of a final restoration has been suggested in the past
(a two-step process), there is no conclusive evidence that
this is necessary. Therefore it is common for clinicians
to place a definitive final restoration that seals the tooth
from microleakage.
If the decision is made to reenter the tooth after 6 to 8
weeks, careful removal of the remaining carious material,

A

B

C

Figure 13-4 Indirect pulp therapy. A, A primary or perma-

nent tooth with deep caries. B, The gross caries has been
removed and the cavity sealed with durable biocompatible
cement or restorative material. C, Six to eight weeks later,
the cavity is reopened and the remaining caries excavated.
A sound dentin barrier protects the pulp, and the tooth is
ready for final restoration. (Courtesy of Dr. Paul E. Starkey.)

Chapter 13

n

Treatment of Deep Caries, Vital Pulp Exposure, and Pulpless Teeth

A

B

C

D

E

F

225

Figure 13-5 A, Second primary molar with deep occlusal caries. Because the tooth was free of symptoms of painful pulpitis,

indirect pulp therapy was completed. B, The gross caries has been removed. A small amount of soft carious dentin remains
at the base of the cavity. C, Calcium hydroxide has been placed over the remaining caries. The cavity may be sealed with a
durable intermediate restorative material. D, After 6 to 8 weeks, the intermediate restorative material is removed. The caries
in the base of the cavity appears arrested and dry. E, The remaining caries has been removed. F, After placement of a biocompatible base, the primary second molar has been restored with amalgam.

226

Chapter 13

n

Treatment of Deep Caries, Vital Pulp Exposure, and Pulpless Teeth

now somewhat sclerotic, may reveal a sound base of dentin
without pulp exposure. If a sound layer of dentin covers
the pulp, the tooth is restored in the conventional manner
(Fig. 13-6). Al-Zayer and associates reported that the use
of a base over the calcium hydroxide liner, in addition to
a stainless steel crown, dramatically increases the success
rate.5 If a small pulp exposure is encountered, a different
type of treatment, based on the clinical signs and symptoms and local conditions, must be used.
Nirschl and Avery performed indirect pulp therapy on
38 carefully selected primary and young permanent teeth.6
Gross caries removal under rubber dam isolation was accomplished, calcium hydroxide was used in each tooth as
a sedative base, and the teeth were restored with amalgam.
Successful treatment occurred in 32 (94.1%) of the 34 teeth
that were available for the 6-month evaluation procedure.
In all cases of successful treatment, the base material and
the residual carious dentin were observed to be dry on reentry and clinical examination. Of the successfully treated
teeth, only four had residual carious dentin that felt somewhat soft when probed with an explorer; in the remainder,
the dentin felt hard. Pinto and colleagues showed similar
dentin consistency results, as well as significantly decreased
bacterial counts at the end of treatment.7

A

VITAL PULP EXPOSURE
Although the routine practice of indirect pulp therapy
in properly selected teeth will significantly reduce the
number of direct pulp exposures encountered, all dentists who treat severe caries in children will be faced with
treatment decisions related to the management of vital
pulp exposures.
The appropriate procedure should be selected only after a careful evaluation of the patient’s symptoms, results
of diagnostic tests, and conditions at the exposure site.
The health of the exposed dental pulp is sometimes difficult to determine, especially in children, and there is
often lack of conformity between clinical symptoms and
histopathologic condition.

B

SIZE OF THE EXPOSURE AND PULPAL
HEMORRHAGE
The size of the exposure, appearance of the pulp, and
amount of bleeding are valuable observations for diagnosing the condition of the primary pulp. Therefore the
use of a rubber dam to isolate the tooth is extremely important; in addition, with the rubber dam the area can
be kept clean and the work can be done more efficiently.
The most favorable condition for vital pulp therapy is
the small pinpoint exposure surrounded by sound dentin.
However, a true carious exposure, even of pinpoint size,
will be accompanied by inflammation of the pulp, the degree of which is usually directly related to the size of the
exposure (Fig. 13-7).
A large exposure—the type that is encountered when
a mass of leathery dentin is removed—is often associated
with a watery exudate or pus at the exposure site. These
conditions are indicative of advanced pulp degeneration and often of internal resorption in the pulp canal.
In addition, excessive hemorrhage at the point of carious

C
Figure 13-6 A, Radiograph of the first permanent molar re-

vealed a deep caries lesion. Gross caries was removed, and
calcium hydroxide was placed over the remaining caries.
The tooth was restored with amalgam and was not reentered for complete caries removal for 3 months. B, Sclerotic
dentin can be seen beneath the remaining caries and the
covering of calcium hydroxide (arrows). C, The tooth was
reentered, and the remaining caries was removed. A sound
dentin barrier was observed at the base of the cavity. A
new amalgam restoration was placed after complete caries
removal.

Chapter 13

n

Treatment of Deep Caries, Vital Pulp Exposure, and Pulpless Teeth

227

A
Figure 13-7 Pulp exposed by caries will show inflammation

at the exposure site. Fragments of necrotic dentin will be
introduced into the pulp during excavation of the caries.

exposure or during pulp amputation is invariably associated with hyperemia and generalized inflammation of the
pulp. When the latter is observed, endodontic therapy or
extraction of the tooth is the treatment of choice.

VITAL PULP THERAPY TECHNIQUES
For many centuries, and probably from almost the beginning of time for humans, there has been a search for
the best (safe and effective) methods of managing pulpal
disease and traumatic pulpal exposure. These efforts have
generated considerable controversy and debate as proponents of specific materials and methods attempt to justify
their chosen techniques. Despite many impressive scientific advancements, these controversies remain unsettled
here in the twenty-first century. The identification of
the best formulations of ingredients and techniques for
producing predictable pulpal healing remains elusive. To
complicate this issue further, the predominant belief is
that pulp therapies appropriate for permanent teeth may
not always be equally effective in treating similar conditions in primary teeth.
It is generally agreed that the prognosis after any type
of pulp therapy improves in the absence of contamination by pathogenic microorganisms. Thus biocompatible
neutralization of any existing pulpal contamination and
prevention of future contamination (e.g., microleakage)
are worthy goals in vital pulp therapy. If the treatment
material in direct contact with the pulp also has some
inherent quality that promotes, stimulates, or accelerates
a true tissue-healing response, so much the better; however, vital pulp tissue can recover from a variety of insults
spontaneously in a favorable environment.
The techniques and procedures discussed in the following pages represent the standards as we perceive them
at this writing. Some go back to the time when treatment
decisions were made empirically. Their effectiveness has
been proved over time, if not by science, and they represent the benchmarks against which newer techniques
are compared. We look forward to having more effective,
biologically compatible, and scientifically sound methods
in the future.

B
Figure 13-8 A, Mesial pulp horn of the mandibular second

primary molar accidentally exposed during cavity preparation was covered with calcium hydroxide. B, Dentinal
bridge across the mesial pulp horn is evidence of pulp
healing.

DIRECT PULP CAPPING
The pulp-capping procedure has been widely practiced for
years and is still the favorite method of many dentists for
treating vital pulp exposures. Although pulp capping has
been condemned by some, others report that, if the teeth
are carefully selected, excellent results can be obtained.
It is generally agreed that pulp-capping procedures
should be limited to small exposures produced accidentally
by trauma or during cavity preparation or to true pinpoint
carious exposures that are surrounded by sound dentin
(Figure 13-8). Pulp capping should be considered only for
teeth in which there is an absence of pain, with the possible
exception of discomfort caused by the intake of food. In
addition, there should be either no bleeding at the exposure
site, as is often the case in a mechanical exposure, or bleeding in an amount that would be considered normal in the
absence of a hyperemic or inflamed pulp.
All pulp treatment procedures should be carried out
with sterile instruments in clean conditions. Use of the
rubber dam will help keep the pulp free of external contamination. All peripheral carious tissue should be excavated before excavation is begun on the portion of the
carious dentin most likely to result in pulp exposure.
Thus most of the bacterially infected tissue will have been
removed before actual pulp exposure occurs. The work of

228

Chapter 13

n

Treatment of Deep Caries, Vital Pulp Exposure, and Pulpless Teeth

Kakehashi and colleagues9 and of Walshe,10 which is described later in this chapter, supports the desirability of
using a surgically clean technique to minimize bacterial
contamination of the pulpal tissue.
Calcium hydroxide remains the standard material for
pulp capping of normal vital pulp tissue; it can possibly
stimulate the repair reaction. A hard-setting calcium hydroxide capping material should be used. If the tooth is
small (such as a first primary molar), hard-setting calcium
hydroxide may also be used as the base for the restoration. Some studies have shown successful results with
direct capping of exposed pulps with adhesive bonding
agents, whereas others have reported pulpal inflammation and unacceptable results with this technique.11 In
addition, the use of mineral trioxide aggregate (MTA) has
shown promise, but further research would be helpful.12

PULPOTOMY
The removal of the coronal portion of the pulp is an accepted procedure for treating both primary and permanent teeth with carious pulp exposures. The justification
for this procedure is that the coronal pulp tissue, which is
adjacent to the carious exposure, usually contains microorganisms and shows evidence of inflammation and degenerative change. The abnormal tissue can be removed,
and the healing can be allowed to take place at the entrance of the pulp canal in an area of essentially normal
pulp. Even the pulpotomy procedure, however, is likely
to result in a high percentage of failures unless the teeth
are carefully selected.
In the pulpotomy procedure, the tooth should first be
anesthetized and isolated with the rubber dam. A surgically clean technique should be used throughout the procedure. All remaining dental caries, as well as the overhanging enamel, should be removed to provide good
access to the coronal pulp. Pain during caries removal
and instrumentation may be an indication of faulty anesthetic technique. More often, however, it indicates pulpal
hyperemia and inflammation, which makes the tooth a
poor risk for vital pulpotomy. If the pulp at the exposure
site bleeds excessively after complete removal of caries,
the tooth is also a poor risk for vital pulpotomy.
The entire roof of the pulp chamber should be removed.
No overhanging dentin from the roof of the pulp chamber or pulp horns should remain. No attempt is made to
control the hemorrhage until the coronal pulp has been
amputated. Funnel-shaped access to the entrance of the
root canals should be created. A sharp discoid spoon excavator, large enough to extend across the entrance of the
individual root canals, may be used to amputate the coronal pulp at its entrance into the canals. The pulp stumps
should be excised cleanly, with no tissue tags extending
across the floor of the pulp chamber. The pulp chamber
should then be irrigated with a light flow of water from
a water syringe and evacuated. Cotton pellets moistened
with water should be placed in the pulp chamber and allowed to remain over the pulp stumps until a clot forms
(Fig. 13-9).
Laboratory and clinical observations indicate that a
different technique and capping material are necessary in
the treatment of primary teeth than in the treatment of

Figure 13-9 Cleanly excised pulpal stumps with no tissue

tags across the floor or along the walls of the chamber.
The hemorrhage has been controlled. Notice also that the
roof of the pulp chamber has been completely removed to
provide total access to the pulp canals.

permanent teeth. As a result of these observations, two
specific pulpotomy techniques have evolved and are in
general use.

Pulpotomy Technique for Permanent Teeth
The use of either calcium hydroxide or MTA can be
recommended in the treatment of permanent teeth
with carious pulp exposures when there is a pathologic
change in the pulp at the exposure site.13,14 This procedure is particularly indicated for permanent teeth with
immature root development but with healthy pulp tissue in the root canals. It is also indicated for a permanent tooth with a pulp exposure resulting from crown
fracture when the trauma has also produced a root fracture of the same tooth. The procedure is completed during a single appointment. Only teeth free of symptoms
of painful pulpitis are considered for treatment. The
procedure involves the amputation of the coronal portion of the pulp as described, the control of hemorrhage,
and the placement of the capping material over the pulp
tissue remaining in the canals (Fig. 13-10). A protective
layer of hard-setting cement is placed over the calcium
hydroxide to provide an adequate seal. The tooth is subsequently prepared for full-coverage restoration. However, if the tissue in the pulp canals appears hyperemic
after the amputation of the coronal tissue, a pulpotomy
should no longer be considered. Endodontic treatment
is indicated if the tooth is to be saved.
After 1 year a tooth that has been treated successfully
with a pulpotomy should have a normal periodontal ligament and lamina dura, radiographic evidence of a calcified bridge, and no radiographic evidence of internal
resorption or pathologic resorption. The treatment of
permanent teeth by the pulpotomy method has ­resulted
in a higher rate of success when the teeth are selected
carefully based on existing knowledge of diagnostic
techniques.

Chapter 13

n

Treatment of Deep Caries, Vital Pulp Exposure, and Pulpless Teeth

A

B

C
Figure 13-10 A, Pulp of the first permanent molar was
exposed by caries. The tooth was considered a candidate
for the calcium hydroxide pulpotomy technique. B, Calcified bridge has formed over the vital pulp in the canals.
C, Continued root development and pulpal recession are
indicative of continuing pulpal vitality. The crown should be
supported with a full-coverage restoration.

Pulpotomy Technique for Primary Teeth
The same diagnostic criteria recommended for the selection of permanent teeth for the pulpotomy procedure
should be used in the selection of primary teeth for this
procedure. The treatment is also completed during a single
appointment. A surgically clean technique should be used.
The coronal portion of the pulp should be a
­ mputated as

229

described previously, the debris should be removed from
the chamber, and the hemorrhage should be controlled.
If there is evidence of hyperemia after the removal of the
coronal pulp, which indicates that inflammation is present in the tissue beyond the coronal portion of the pulp,
the technique should be abandoned in favor of pulpectomy or the removal of the tooth. If the hemorrhage is
controlled readily and the pulp stumps appear normal, it
may be assumed that the pulp tissue in the canals is normal, and it is possible to proceed with pulpotomy.
Although the formocresol pulpotomy technique has
been recommended for many years as the principal
method for treating primary teeth with carious exposures, a substantial shift away from use of this medicament has occurred because of concerns about its toxic
effects. Many alternatives, including MTA, sodium hypochlorite, ferric sulfate, electrosurgery, and lasers, have
been investigated to replace formocresol as the medicament of choice for pulpotomy. Despite this, formocresol continues to be a very commonly used pulpotomy
medicament.15 Indeed, Milnes’ reevaluation of earlier
and more recent research about formaldehyde metabolism, pharmacokinetics, and carcinogenicity led him to
suggest that there is an inconsequential risk associated
with the use of formocresol in pediatric pulp therapy.16
The pulp chamber is dried with sterile cotton pellets.
Next, a pellet of cotton moistened with a 1:5 concentration of Buckley’s formocresol and blotted on sterile
gauze to remove the excess is placed in contact with the
pulp stumps and allowed to remain for 5 minutes. Because formocresol is caustic, care must be taken to avoid
contact with the gingival tissues. The pellets are then removed, and the pulp chamber is dried with new pellets.
A thick paste of hard-setting zinc oxide–eugenol is prepared and placed over the pulp stumps. The tooth is then
restored with a stainless steel crown (Fig. 13-11).
Although the recommendation is that the blotted cotton pellet moistened with a 1:5 concentration of formocresol be applied to the pulp stumps for 5 minutes, the
5-minute application time has been determined somewhat arbitrarily. Few data are available to verify the optimal application time, although García-Godoy and colleagues have suggested that, based on their limited work
with pulpotomies in dogs, a 1-minute application time
may be adequate and perhaps superior to the recommended 5 minutes.17
Buckley’s original formula for formocresol calls for
equal parts of formaldehyde and cresol (Sultan Chemists, Inc., Englewood, New Jersey, United States). The 1:5
concentration of this formula is prepared by, first, thoroughly mixing three parts of glycerin with one part of
distilled water, and then adding four parts of this diluent
to one part of Buckley’s formocresol, followed again by
thorough mixing.
Despite the continuing common use of formocresol,
other materials and techniques have been studied and
are used regularly in practice. An excellent prospective
randomized clinical trial was conducted by Fernandez
­
and others,18 comparing the use of formocresol, MTA, sodium hypochlorite, and ferric sulfate. They used a pulpotomy technique and formocresol application similar to

230

Chapter 13

n

Treatment of Deep Caries, Vital Pulp Exposure, and Pulpless Teeth

that described above. The use of the other 3 medicaments
was as follows:
  
•	MTA: the pulp stumps were covered with an MTA
paste made by mixing of the MTA powder with sterile
saline at a ratio of 3:1
•	Ferric sulfate: 20% ferric sulfate solution was used to
burnish the pulp stumps for 15 seconds with a syringe
applicator
•	Sodium hypochlorite: a 5% NaOCl-saturated cotton
pellet was placed on the pulp stumps for 30 seconds
  
Both the ferric sulfate and sodium hypochlorite solutions were rinsed off with water to verify that no blood
clot was present before restoration. In all 4 groups, a polymer-reinforced zinc oxide–eugenol material was placed in
the pulp chamber, and the teeth were restored with stainless steel crowns. Each group began with 25 treated teeth,
and at the end of 24 months of follow-up, of the teeth
available for study, no statistically significant difference
was found among the 4 groups.

NONVITAL PULP TREATMENT WITH
IRREVERSIBLE PULPITIS OR NECROTIC
PULP
PULPECTOMY
A pulpectomy may be performed on primary teeth when
the coronal pulp tissue and the tissue entering the pulp

canals are vital but show clinical evidence of hyperemia
(Fig. 13-12) or if the root canals show evidence of necrosis (suppuration). It is unwise to maintain untreated infected primary teeth in the mouth. They may be opened
for drainage and often remain asymptomatic for an indefinite period. However, they are a source of infection
and should be treated or removed. The morphology of
the root canals in primary teeth makes endodontic treatment difficult and often impractical. Mature first primary
molar canals are often so small that they are inaccessible
even to the smallest barbed broach. If the canal cannot be
properly cleansed of necrotic material, sterilized, and adequately filled, endodontic therapy is more likely to fail.
Hibbard and Ireland studied the primary root canal
morphology by removing the pulp from extracted teeth,
forcing acrylic resin into the pulp canals, and dissolving the covering of tooth structure in 10% nitric acid.19
It was apparent that, initially, only one root canal was
present in each of the mandibular and maxillary molar
roots. The subsequent deposition of secondary dentin
throughout the life of the teeth caused a change in the
morphologic pattern of the root canal, producing variations and eventual alterations in the numbers and sizes
of the canals. The variations included lateral branching,
connecting fibrils, apical ramifications, and partial fusion of the canals. The use of micro-computed tomography has produced some exquisite views of the anatomy
of primary molars (Figs. 13-13 and 13-14). These findings
explain the complications often encountered in root canal therapy.
Endodontic procedures for the treatment of primary
teeth are indicated if the canals are accessible and if there
is evidence of essentially normal supporting bone. Aminabadi and colleagues have demonstrated that while
primary second molars are more accessible than first molars, all of them are negotiable.20 In addition, other studies have investigated ultrasonic instrumentation21 and
root apex locators22 in the root canal treatment of primary teeth. If the supporting bone is also compromised,
the likelihood of successful endodontic therapy is lower.

A

B
Figure 13-11 A, Formocresol pulpotomy technique was

completed. B, Normal appearance of the supporting tissues
is indicative of a successful treatment. The tooth should
now be restored with a stainless steel crown.

Figure 13-12 Histologic section of a second primary molar

with a carious pulp exposure. There was clinical evidence of
hyperemia and inflammation of the pulp. Inflammation is
evident in half the coronal pulp and in the pulp canal. This
condition should be treated by the pulpectomy technique.

Chapter 13

n

Treatment of Deep Caries, Vital Pulp Exposure, and Pulpless Teeth

If the second primary molar is lost before the eruption of
the first permanent molar, the dentist is confronted with
the difficult problem of preventing the first permanent
molar from drifting mesially during its eruption. S­ pecial
effort should be made to treat and retain the second
primary molar, even if it has a necrotic pulp. Similarly,
longer-than-normal retention of a second primary molar
may be desired when the succedaneous second premolar
is congenitally missing (Fig. 13-15).

Figure 13-13 Micro-computed tomography of a mandibular

second primary molar root canal system. (Courtesy of Dr.
Ashraf Al-Hosainy, Mansoura University School of Dentistry,
Egypt.)

231

Many dentists prefer to use root canal instruments
placed in a special rotary handpiece and nickel titanium
files for root canal debridement. Root canal instrumentation may be facilitated with the judicious use of this mechanical technique, especially in canals that are difficult
to negotiate with hand instruments. Cautious manipulation is important, however, to prevent breaking the file or
overinstrumentation of the canal and apical tissues.
After the pulp tissue has been removed from the canals,
a syringe is used to irrigate them with 3% hydrogen peroxide followed by sodium hypochlorite. The canals should
then be dried with sterile paperpoints. When hemorrhage
is controlled and the canals remain dry, a thin mix of filling paste may be prepared. Small Kerr files may be used
to apply the paste to the walls. The excess thin paste may
be removed with paperpoints and Hedström files. A thick
mix of the treatment paste should then be prepared, rolled
into a point, and carried into the canal. Root canal pluggers may be used to condense the filling material into the
canals. Alternatively a Lentulo spiral file can be placed on
an endodontic handpiece to spiral the filling material into
the canals. An x-ray film may be necessary to allow the
success in filling the canals to be evaluated (Fig. 13-16).
Further condensation may be carried out if required. The
tooth should be restored with full coverage.
Although zinc oxide–eugenol paste has been viewed
as the traditional root canal filling material for primary
teeth, results from multiple studies23-28 suggest that KRI
paste (Pharmachemie AG, Zürich, Switzerland) may be
preferable. Excellent results have been observed in many
cases. The primary components of KRI paste are zinc oxide and iodoform. The main advantages of KRI paste over
zinc oxide–eugenol paste are that KRI paste resorbs in
synchrony with primary roots and is less irritating to surrounding tissues if a root is inadvertently overfilled.
Another popular root canal filling material for primary teeth is Vitapex (Dia Dent Group International, Inc.,

Figure 13-14 Three views of micro-computed tomographs of a mandibular second primary molar root canal system obturated

with Vitapex. (Courtesy of Dr. Ashraf Al-Hosainy, Mansoura University School of Dentistry, Egypt.)

232

Chapter 13

n

Treatment of Deep Caries, Vital Pulp Exposure, and Pulpless Teeth

A

B

C

D

Figure 13-15 A, Necrotic tooth resulting from a carious exposure of the pulp of the second primary molar. Because the succedaneous second premolar was congenitally missing, a decision was made to attempt to save the tooth as a functional space
maintainer through the growing years, if possible. Note the evidence of internal resorption at the floor of the pulp chamber.
B, Radiograph made 1 year and 7 months after the pulp canals were treated and filled. The mesial canal was treated with
complete pulpectomy; the distal canal was treated with partial pulpectomy. C, Six years and seven months after treatment,
the tooth is asymptomatic; the supporting tissues appear normal, but some root resorption has occurred. D, Fourteen years
and six months postoperatively, the tooth was extracted because of the development of symptoms and loss of bone support.
At this time, the patient was a young adult, and a fixed bridge was made.

­ ancouver, British Columbia, Canada), a product that has
V
received many favorable reports about its successful use in
infected primary teeth. The primary components of Vitapex
are calcium hydroxide and iodoform. Vitapex may be at least
as effective as KRI paste, and Nurko and García-Godoy26,29
have published some reports of studies in humans.
Currently, pulpectomies in primary teeth are commonly completed in a single appointment. If the tooth
has painful necrosis with purulence in the canals, however, completing the pulpectomy procedure over two or
three visits should improve the likelihood of success.

SUMMARY OF PULP THERAPY
The preceding discussion of various pulp therapies conforms, in principle, to the Guidelines for Pulp Therapy for
Primary and Young Permanent Teeth as published by the
American Academy of Pediatric Dentistry (AAPD).30
In cases of clinical problems that will likely require pulp
therapy to return the patient to satisfactory oral health,

treatment decisions are not always clear-cut. Proper diagnosis of the pulpal problem is important to allow the dentist to
select the most conservative treatment procedure that offers
the best chance of long-term success with the least chance
of subsequent complications. The dentist should think of
the possible treatment options in a progressive manner
that takes into account both treatment conservatism (e.g.,
a pulpotomy is more conservative than a pulpectomy) and
posttreatment problems (Fig. 13-17). The most conservative
treatment possible may not always be the indicated procedure after the dentist also weighs the risks of posttreatment
failure in a particular case (Video 13-1: Pulp therapy).

RESTORATION OF THE PULPALLY
INVOLVED TOOTH
It has been a common practice for some dentists to delay
for weeks or months the permanent restoration of a tooth
that has undergone vital pulp therapy, to allow time
to determine whether the treatment procedure will be

Chapter 13

n

Treatment of Deep Caries, Vital Pulp Exposure, and Pulpless Teeth

233

Indirect pulp therapy
Direct pulp cap

Pulpotomy

A

Pulpectomy

Figure 13-17 Pulp therapy progression.

B

C
Figure 13-16 Successful single-appointment pulpectomy.

Note extrusion of zinc oxide–eugenol into furcal area from
distal root accessory canal, but adequate subsequent healing. A, Pretreatment. B, Immediately after treatment. C,
Ten months after treatment.
successful. However, failures in pulp therapy are usually
not evident for many months. Rarely does a failure in
pulp therapy or an endodontic procedure on a primary
tooth cause the child to experience acute symptoms. Failures are usually evidenced by pathologic root resorption
or rarefied areas in the bone and are discovered during
regular recall appointments.
Primary and permanent molars that have been treated
by the pulpotomy or pulpectomy technique have a weak,
unsupported crown that is liable to fracture. Failure of the
buccal or lingual plate often occurs below the gingival attachment or even below the crest of the alveolar bone.

This type of fracture makes subsequent restoration of the
tooth impractical. Also, a delay in restoring the tooth
with a material that will adequately seal the tooth and
prevent the ingress of oral fluids is one cause for failure
of pulp therapy. Application of a layer of hard-setting cement over the capping material, followed by a substantial
restoration, will adequately protect the pulp against contaminating oral fluids during the healing process.
An amalgam, composite resin, or glass-ionomer restoration may serve as the immediate and often the final
restoration for teeth with pulp caps and well-supported
crowns. As soon as it is practical, however, other pulpally treated posterior teeth should be prepared for stainless steel crowns. Pulp treatment of a primary molar is
typically followed by placement of a stainless steel crown
restoration during the same appointment.

REACTION OF THE PULP TO VARIOUS
CAPPING MATERIALS
So many different materials have been proposed that a
brief review of several popular agents is valuable for an
understanding of the various reactions of the pulp. In addition to this section, Chen and Jorden present a wellwritten article on the present and future of materials for
primary tooth pulp treatment.31

ZINC OXIDE–EUGENOL
Before calcium hydroxide came into common use, zinc
oxide–eugenol was used more often than any other pulpcapping material. Although dentists have apparently had
good clinical results with the use of zinc oxide–eugenol,
it is not recommended as a direct pulp-capping material.

CALCIUM HYDROXIDE
Herman first introduced calcium hydroxide as a biological dressing.32 Because of its high alkalinity (pH 12), it is

234

Chapter 13

n

Treatment of Deep Caries, Vital Pulp Exposure, and Pulpless Teeth

so caustic that when it is placed in contact with vital pulp
tissue, the reaction produces a superficial necrosis of the
pulp. The irritant qualities seem to be related to its ability
to stimulate development of a calcified barrier. The superficial necrotic area in the pulp that develops beneath the
calcium hydroxide is demarcated from the healthy pulp
tissue below by a new, deeply staining zone comprised of
basophilic elements of the calcium hydroxide dressing.
The original proteinate zone is still present. However,
against this zone is a new area of coarse fibrous tissue
likened to a primitive type of bone. On the periphery
of the new fibrous tissue, cells resembling odontoblasts
appear to be lining up. One month after the capping procedure, a calcified bridge is evident radiographically. This
bridge continues to increase in thickness during the next
12 months (Fig. 13-18). The pulp tissue beneath the calcified bridge remains vital and is essentially free of inflammatory cells.
Many studies have reported on the use of calcium hydroxide as a pulp-capping material; a few are included in
the references for this chapter. Investigators who evaluate
experimental pulp-capping agents commonly compare
their results with the agent being tested with the results
they can obtain with calcium hydroxide under similar
conditions. Thus calcium hydroxide currently serves as
the standard or control material for experimentation related to pulp-capping agents.

PREPARATIONS CONTAINING FORMALIN
The belief that exposing the pulp to formocresol or capping it with materials that contain formocresol will promote pulp healing or even maintain the pulp in a healthy
state has not been adequately substantiated. Some studies have indicated that the formocresol pulpotomy technique may be applied to permanent teeth, but its use in
permanent teeth remains an interim procedure, to be followed by conventional endodontic therapy. The clinical
success experienced in the treatment of primary pulps
with these materials is possibly related more to the drug’s
germicidal action and fixation qualities than to its ability
to promote healing.
Doyle and associates compared the success of the fullstrength formocresol pulpotomy technique with the success of the calcium hydroxide pulpotomy technique.33
Experimental pulpotomies were performed on 65 normal
human primary teeth, many of which could later be extracted for histologic examination. The formocresol technique was used on 33 teeth, and the calcium hydroxide
technique was used in the treatment of the other 32. Under the conditions of this study, the formocresol pulpotomy technique yielded outcomes superior to those of
the calcium hydroxide technique for at least the first 18
months after treatment. Formocresol did not stimulate
the healing response of the remaining pulp tissue but
rather tended to fix essentially all the remaining tissue
(Figs. 13-19 and 13-20). The use of calcium hydroxide was
associated with the formation of a dentin bridge and the
complete healing of the amputated primary pulp in 50%
of the cases that were available for histologic study.

FERRIC SULFATE

Figure 13-18 Calcified bridge covering an amputated pulp

that was capped with calcium hydroxide.

Considerable interest and research have been devoted to
investigating the effectiveness of ferric sulfate to treat the
surface of the remaining pulp tissue after pulpotomy of
primary teeth. Ferric sulfate agglutinates blood proteins
and controls hemorrhage in the process without clot formation.
Fuks and two groups of co-workers have contributed
favorable data from an animal study and a longer-term
clinical human study (mean observation period, 20.5
months).34,35 Their success rates for ferric sulfate pulpotomies were very similar to those for diluted formocresol
pulpotomies (control condition). More long-term clinical
studies are needed, but currently it appears that ferric sulfate could be a better choice for treating primary teeth
needing pulpotomy (results equal to those achieved with
diluted formocresol but with less toxicity). Ferric sulfate is
available in a 15.5% solution under the trade name of Astringedent (Ultradent Products, Inc., South Jordan, Utah,
United States).
A study by Casas and colleagues compared the outcome of ferric sulfate pulpotomy with that of primary
tooth root canal therapy (pulpectomy) on cariously exposed vital pulps of primary molars.36 Although their
study showed that root canal therapy had produced
more acceptable treatment outcomes than ferric sulfate
pulpotomy in vital pulp treatment of primary molars at
a 2-year follow-up visit, the survival rates for the two

Chapter 13

n

Treatment of Deep Caries, Vital Pulp Exposure, and Pulpless Teeth

techniques were not statistically different. There was no
clinical evidence of pathosis in 96% of the ferric sulfate
pulpotomies and 98% of the molars undergoing root canal therapy. They suggest that, for clinicians who wish to
avoid aldehydes in vital molar pulp therapy for children,
either of these two alternatives is feasible. Of course, the
main advantage of the ferric sulfate pulpotomy over a
pulpectomy for dentists working with children is the
considerably faster speed with which a pulpotomy can
be performed.

MINERAL TRIOXIDE AGGREGATE
MTA is emerging as a popular product for pulpotomies
secondary to a variety of factors. Originally developed as
a root-end filling material, its main components are tricalcium silicate, tricalcium aluminate, tricalcium oxide,
and silicate oxide.37 The positive properties of MTA are
biocompatibility, good sealing properties, antimicrobial
activity, and the ability to set in the presence of moisture and blood. The negative attributes include difficulty
of handling and the exceptional cost. In addition, along
with formocresol and ferric sulfate, MTA can cause pulp
canal obliteration. Despite this, it seems to come closest to our goal of formation of a natural dentinal bridge
across the exposed pulpal tissue.

235

OTHER CAPPING MATERIALS AND METHODS
Pulp-capping experiments in animals have tested a variety of antibiotics and corticosteroids, alone or in combination with calcium hydroxide; in the 1970s interest
in pulp-capping research shifted to other experimental
materials.
Dickey and associates38 tested a crystalline form of
pure calcium hydroxyapatite, and Ibarra39 evaluated an
experimental synthetic hydroxyapatite used in combination with either chlorhexidine gluconate solution or distilled water as vehicles. None of these was as satisfactory
as calcium hydroxide as a pulp-capping material. In addition, they were somewhat difficult to manipulate.
In other investigations in search of improved pulpcapping materials, agents that showed at least promising preliminary results have included freeze-dried bone,
chlorhexidine, feracrylum, calcium phosphate ceramics,
tetracalcium phosphate cement, dentin-bonding agents
in combination with bonded resin or glass-ionomer materials, and bone morphogenetic proteins.40-51
In an excellent review on pulpotomies in primary teeth,
Ranly suggested that pulpotomy modalities can be classified by treatment objective into three categories: devitalization, preservation, and regeneration.52 He noted that

A

B

A

C

B

Figure 13-19 Histologic section of a primary pulp exposed

to formocresol for 4 days. The medicament came into
contact with the pulp at A, the debris and blood clot are
evident at B, and a noticeably eosinophilic, compressed line
is evident at C. The underlying pulp was a pale, homogeneously stained tissue with a loss of basophilic nuclei.
(Courtesy of Dr. Walter A. Doyle.)

Figure 13-20 Histologic section of a primary pulp exposed

to formocresol for 41 days. The pulp, A, appeared pale and
pink, and there was a loss of cellular definition. Vital tissue
can be seen in the apical portion, B. (Courtesy of Dr. Walter
A. Doyle.)

236

Chapter 13

n

Treatment of Deep Caries, Vital Pulp Exposure, and Pulpless Teeth

the treatment objective of an ideal pulpotomy agent is to
leave the radicular pulp vital and healthy and completely
enclosed within an odontoblast-lined dentin chamber.
The regeneration modality most closely resembles this
ideal. Through the use of a family of bone morphogenetic
proteins, it may be possible to induce reparative dentin
formation with recombinant dentinogenic proteins similar to the native proteins of the body. Fuks suggests that
because the specificity of growth factors such as transforming growth factor β and bone morphogenetic protein
in inducing reparative processes is not clear, further studies are required for a full understanding of the kinetics of
growth factor release and the sequence of growth factor–
induced reparative dentinogenesis.11 Commercially available recombinant human bone morphogenetic proteins
for pulp therapy are now available for experimentation
and clinical trials. In addition, Sabbarini and others have
demonstrated the effective use, both histologically and
clinically, of an enamel matrix derivative as a pulpotomy
agent in primary teeth.53,54
Ruemping and associates compared the pulp response
to formocresol with electrosurgical coagulation after
pulpotomies in the teeth of monkeys.55 The sample size
was not large, and the observation periods were relatively
short (maximum was 2 months after the operation), but
the results of their histologic study showed the electrosurgical technique to be as favorable as the full-strength
formocresol technique. Shaw and associates have also
demonstrated favorable results lasting up to 6 months
with electrosurgical pulpotomies in monkeys.56
Mack and Dean reported the results of a retrospective
human study of electrosurgical pulpotomies performed
on primary molars.57 The mean postoperative observation
time for the 164 teeth studied was 2 years and 3 months.
They reported a 99.4% success rate (one failure) for this
pulpotomy technique. In addition, Dean and colleagues
demonstrated no statistically significant difference between the electrosurgical and formocresol pulpotomy techniques in a prospective clinical study involving 50 children
requiring at least one pulpotomy.58 The children were randomly divided into two groups, with 25 undergoing the
electrosurgical technique and 25 undergoing the formocresol technique. The mean age at treatment was 63.6
months, and the mean postoperative observation time was
10.9 months. The clinical and radiographic success rates
were 96% and 84%, respectively, for the electrosurgical
group, and 100% and 92%, respectively, for the formocresol group. There was no statistically significant difference
between results for the two techniques, although the electrosurgical group did have four failures, whereas two failures occurred in the formocresol group. These researchers
concluded that the results of their study support the use of
electrosurgical pulpotomy as a viable alternative to formocresol pulpotomy. Rivera and colleagues59 obtained results
similar to those of Dean and associates; however, Fishman
and colleagues60 found considerably lower success rates
with the use of electrosurgical pulpotomy.
Shoji and colleagues reported the results of some preliminary studies on the treatment of amputated pulps (pulpotomies) in dogs by CO2 laser radiation.61 Wilkerson and
colleagues reported favorable pulpal responses of healing

and repair in swine following pulpotomies involving an
argon laser.62 Moritz and associates applied 200 direct pulp
caps in adult patients after mechanical pulp exposures.63
Half of the teeth (control group) received a conventional
calcium hydroxide pulp cap. The other half (experimental
group) received a calcium hydroxide cap after first undergoing CO2 laser radiation until the “exposed pulps were
completely sealed.” The teeth were monitored monthly.
One year after treatment, the success rate for teeth in the
experimental group was 89%, whereas the success rate in
the control group was 68%. While both the electrosurgical and the laser techniques seem to be favorable areas for
further research in pulp therapy, a systematic review by De
Coster and others states that, given the paucity and heterogeneity of high-quality articles, general recommendations
for the clinical use of the laser in pulpotomies for primary
teeth cannot yet be made.64

SUMMARY OF PULP-CAPPING MATERIALS
Clarity does seem to be developing regarding some research results that should allow for the use of successful
alternatives to formocresol.65 In fact the network metaanalyses by Lin and others led them to suggest that MTA
is the first choice for primary molar pulpotomies, unless
cost is an issue.66 In that case they suggest that ferric sulfate may be the choice (Table 13-1, Fig. 13-21).
However, the following survey conclusions by Dunston and Coll67 show that we continue to lack uniformity
in agreement:
Conclusions from 2005 vs 1997 surveys of U.S. dental
schools and diplomates of the American Board of Pediatric
Dentistry:
  
1.	For indirect pulp therapy, there was significantly
more use of glass ionomer and fewer zinc oxide–­
eugenol or calcium hydroxide liners; most did not
reenter a tooth following indirect pulp therapy.
2.	Formocresol remained the preferred pulpotomy
medicament, but ferric sulfate use had increased. Zinc
oxide–eugenol remained the base of choice after a
pulpotomy.
3.	Slightly less pulpectomy therapy was advocated for
abscessed teeth. When such therapy was performed,
more dentists advocated combined iodoform and
calcium hydroxide paste fillers. Few advocated a twoappointment pulpectomy procedure.
4.	Disagreements continue, and the AAPD pulp therapy
guidelines and results of pulpal research were not
always applied.
5.	Diplomates tended to practice pulpal therapy similar
to that taught by program directors.

FAILURES AFTER VITAL PULP THERAPY
Failure in the formation of a calcified bridge across the
­vital pulp has often been related to the age of the patient,
­degree of surgical trauma, sealing pressure, improper choice
of capping material, low threshold of host resistance, and
presence of microorganisms with subsequent infection.
Kakehashi and colleagues studied the effects of surgical
exposures of dental pulps in germ-free and conventional
laboratory rats.9 The injured pulpal tissue ­contaminated

Chapter 13

n

Treatment of Deep Caries, Vital Pulp Exposure, and Pulpless Teeth

237

Table 13-1
Failure Odds Ratio of Network and Standard Meta-Analysis for Clinical and Radiographic Outcome
for Primary Molar Pulpotomy after 18-24–Month Follow-Up
CLINICAL OUTCOME
Network Meta-Analysis

FS vs FC
Ca(OH)2 vs FC
MTA vs FC
Lasers vs FC
Ca(OH)2 vs FS
MTA vs FS
Lasers vs FS
MTA vs
Ca(OH)2
Lasers vs
Ca(OH)2
Lasers vs MTA

RADIOGRAPHIC OUTCOME

Standard Pair-Wise
­Meta-Analysis

Network Meta-Analysis

Standard Pair-Wise

Estimates

95% CI

Estimates

95% CI

Estimates

95% CI

Estimates

95% CI

0.90
1.94
0.90
3.38
2.16
1.00
3.73
0.47

(0.48, 1.65)
(1.11, 3.25)*
(0.61, 1.32)
(1.37, 8.61)*
(1.12, 4.31)*
(0.54, 1.86)
(1.27, 11.67)*
(0.26, 0.83)*

1.00
1.20
0.91
1.35
1.22
0.91
1.13
0.80

(0.88, 1.12)
(1.05, 1.37)*
(0.79, 1.05)
(1.14, 1.60)*
(1.04, 1.42)*
(0.70, 1.19)
(0.92, 1.39)
(0.52, 1.23)

1.02
2.97
0.66
2.54
2.90
0.64
2.47
0.22

(0.60, 1.78)
(1.78, 4.99)*
(0.45, 0.98)*
(1.32, 4.76)*
(1.56, 5.54)*
(0.35, 1.22)
(1.11, 5.23)*
(0.12, 0.41)

1.0
1.40
0.83
1.38
1.37
0.88
1.27
0.58

(0.91, 1.11)
(1.19, 1.65)*
(0.73, 0.96)*
(1.15, 1.66)*
(1.13, 1.67)*
(0.66, 1.18)
(1.00, 1.62)*
(0.33, 1.00)

1.72

(0.62, 4.98)

0.89

(0.68, 1.16)

0.86

(0.40, 1.72)

0.79

(0.56, 1.12)

3.76

(1.39, 10.08)*

3.88

(1.85, 8.05)*

Reprinted with permission from Lin P-Y et al: Primary molar pulpotomy: a systematic review and network meta-analysis. J Dent, 42(9):
1060-77, 2014.
*p <0.05
vs, versus; CI, credible interval; FC, formocresol; FS, ferric sulfate; MTA, mineral trioxide aggregate.

Figure 13-21 Network for the comparisons among different

medicaments for primary molar pulpotomy. Dotted lines refer to those comparisons that have not been tested directly
in clinical trials. The width of the solid lines is in proportion to the amount of evidence available in the literature.
(Reprinted with permission from Lin P-Y et al: Primary molar
pulpotomy: a systematic review and network meta-analysis,
J Dent, 42(9):1060-77, 2014.)
with microorganisms failed to show evidence of repair;
especially lacking were matrix formation and attempted
dentinal bridging. In the germ-free animals, bridging began in 14 days and was complete in 28 days regardless of
the severity of the exposure. The major determinant in the
healing of exposed rodent pulps appeared to be the presence or absence of microorganisms. These findings were
later corroborated by Watts and Paterson.68
Walshe provided further evidence that the success
of vital pulp therapy depends on adherence to a surgically aseptic technique. In his experiment, the teeth of

monkeys were capped with bovine dentin mixed with
methylcellulose, and histologic observations were made
42 days postoperatively.10 Approximately half the teeth
capped with the experimental material were successfully
repaired with atubular dentin (Fig. 13-22). The remaining
teeth showed various degrees of inflammation and repair.
The Brown and Bren staining technique demonstrated
the presence of microorganisms in the pulp of the teeth
that failed to repair (Figs. 13-23 and 13-24). The stain also
revealed microorganisms between the dentin walls and
the filling material. The microorganisms were apparently
introduced at the time of the pulp-capping procedure, or
leakage of the restoration allowed them to gain entrance
to the pulp chamber. This study likewise supports the
need for a good surgical technique and the placement of
a restoration that will provide the best possible seal.

INTERNAL RESORPTION
Radiographic evidence of internal resorption occurring
within the pulp canal several months after the pulpotomy procedure is the most frequently seen evidence of an
abnormal response in primary teeth (Fig. 13-25). Internal
resorption is a destructive process generally believed to
be caused by odontoclastic activity, and it may progress
slowly or rapidly. Occasionally, secondary repair of the
resorbed dentinal area occurs.
No satisfactory explanation for the postpulpotomy
type of internal resorption has been given. It has been
demonstrated, however, that with a true carious exposure
of the pulp, an inflammatory process will be present to
some degree. The inflammation may be limited to the exposure site, or it may be diffused throughout the coronal
portion of the pulp. Amputation of all pulp showing the

238

Chapter 13

n

Treatment of Deep Caries, Vital Pulp Exposure, and Pulpless Teeth

Figure 13-22 Surgical exposure of the

pulp of a monkey was capped with
powdered bovine dentin. Atubular
dentin bridging the exposure site was
evident 42 days postoperatively.

Figure 13-23 Pulps capped with bo-

vine dentin failed to undergo calcific
repair and demonstrated microorganisms (arrows) in the pulp. (Courtesy of
Dr. Martin Walshe.)

Figure 13-24 Microorganisms (arrow) may be

seen between the dentin walls and the filling
material. (Courtesy of Dr. Martin Walshe.)

Chapter 13

n

Treatment of Deep Caries, Vital Pulp Exposure, and Pulpless Teeth

239

A

B

C

Figure 13-25 A, Preoperative radiograph of a second primary molar treated with the calcium hydroxide pulpotomy technique.
B, Two years after treatment, internal resorption and bone rarefaction are evident. C, There may have been inflammation of
the pulp apical to the amputation site and beginning internal resorption at the time of the initial treatment.

inflammatory change may be difficult or impossible, and
abnormal pulp tissue may be allowed to remain. If the
inflammation extended to the entrance of the pulp canal, odontoclasts may have been attracted to the area; if
it were possible to examine the tooth histologically, small
bays of resorption would be evident. This condition may
exist at the time of pulp therapy, although there is no
way to detect it. The only indication would be the clinical
evidence of a hyperemic pulp.
Inflammatory cells drawn to the area as a result of the
placement of an irritating capping material might well attract odontoclastic cells and initiate internal resorption.
This may explain the occurrence of internal resorption even
though the pulp is normal at the time of treatment. Because
the roots of primary teeth are undergoing normal physiologic resorption, vascularity of the apical region is increased.
Odontoclastic activity present in the area may predispose
the tooth to internal resorption when an irritant in the form
of a pulp-capping material is placed on the pulp.

ALVEOLAR ABSCESS
An alveolar abscess occasionally develops some months
after pulp therapy has been completed. The tooth usually
remains asymptomatic, and the child is unaware of the

infection, which may be present in the bone surrounding the root apices or in the area of the root bifurcation.
A fistulous opening may be present, which indicates the
chronic condition of the infection. Primary teeth that
show evidence of an alveolar abscess should be removed.
Permanent teeth that have previously been treated by
pulp capping or by pulpotomy and later show evidence
of pulpal necrosis and apical infection may be considered
for endodontic treat­ment.

EARLY EXFOLIATION OR
OVER-RETENTION OF PRIMARY TEETH
WITH PULP TREATMENTS
Occasionally a pulpally treated tooth previously believed
to be successfully managed will loosen and exfoliate (or
require extraction) prematurely for no apparent reason. It
is believed that such a condition results from low-grade,
chronic, asymptomatic, localized infection. Usually, abnormal and incomplete root resorption patterns of the
affected teeth are also observed. When this occurs, space
management must be considered.
Another sequela requiring close observation is the
tendency for primary teeth undergoing successful

240

Chapter 13

n

Treatment of Deep Caries, Vital Pulp Exposure, and Pulpless Teeth

A

B

C

D

Figure 13-26 A, A pulpally involved second primary molar was successfully treated with a formocresol pulpotomy and restored
with a stainless steel crown. B, This 4-year posttreatment radiograph reveals long-term successful management. C and D,
Bilateral bitewing radiographs for the same patient 7 years after the pulpotomy reveal that the resorption of the pulpotomized
molar is falling behind compared with its antimere. The eruption of the permanent second premolar is also being delayed. The
pulpally treated tooth should be extracted at this time. (Courtesy of Dr. Wayne A. Moldenhauer.)

pulpotomies or pulpectomies to be over-retained. This
­situation may have the untoward result of interfering
with the normal eruption of permanent teeth and adversely affecting the developing occlusion. Close periodic observation of pulpally treated teeth is necessary to
intercept such a developing problem. Extraction of the
primary tooth is usually sufficient. This phenomenon
may occur when normal physiologic exfoliation is delayed by the bulky amount of cement contained in the
pulp chamber. Even though the material is resorbable,
its resorption is slowed significantly when large quantities are present (Fig. 13-26).

REFERENCES
1.	Waterhouse PJ, et al.: Pediatric endodontics, in Cohen’s pathways of the pulp. In Hargreaves KM, Cohen S, editors: ed 10,
St. Louis, 2011, Mosby-Elsevier, pp 808–857.
2.	Hori A, et al.: The ability of pulp sensibility tests to evaluate the pulp status in primary teeth, Int J Paediatr Dent
21(6):441–445, 2011.
3.	Miwa Z, et al.: Pulpal blood flow in vital and nonvital young
permanent teeth measured by transmitted-light photoplethysmography: a pilot study, Pediatr Dent 24(6):594–598,
2002.

4.	Dunlop RM, et al.: Pulp therapy in pediatric patients with
congenital heart disease: survey of American Academy of Pediatric Dentistry members, J Dent Child 80(3):139–144, 2013.
5.	Al-Zayer MA, et al.: Indirect pulp treatment of primary posterior teeth: a retrospective study, Pediatr Dent 25(1):29–36, 2003.
6.	Nirschl RF, Avery DR: Evaluation of a new pulp capping
agent in indirect pulp therapy, J Dent Child 50:25–30, 1983.
7.	Pinto AS, et al.: Clinical and microbiological effect of calcium hydroxide protection in indirect pulp capping in primary teeth, Am J Dent 19(6):382–386, 2006.
8.	Reference deleted in proofs.
9.	Kakehashi S, et al.: The effects of surgical exposure of dental pulps in germ-free and conventional laboratory rats, Oral
Surg 20:340–349, 1965.
10.	Walshe MJ: Pulp reaction to anorganic bovine dentin [Master’s thesis], Indianapolis, 1967, Indiana University School of Dentistry.
11.	Fuks AB: Current concepts in vital primary pulp therapy, Eur
J Paediatr Dent 3(3):115–120, 2002.
12.	Caicedo R, et al.: Clinical, radiographic and histological analysis of the effects of mineral trioxide aggregate used in direct
pulp capping and pulpotomies of primary teeth, Aust Dent J
51(4):297–305, 2006.
13.	Chailertvanitul P, et al.: Randomized control trial comparing calcium hydroxide and mineral trioxide aggregate for
­partial pulpotomies in cariously exposed pulps of permanent
­molars, Int Endod J 47(9):835–842, 2014.

Chapter 13

n

Treatment of Deep Caries, Vital Pulp Exposure, and Pulpless Teeth

14.	Witherspoon DE, Small JC, Harris GZ: Mineral trioxide aggregate pulpotomies: a case series outcomes assessment, J Am
Dent Assoc 137(5):610–618, 2006.
15.	Walker LA, et al.: Current trends in pulp therapy: a survey
analyzing pulpotomy techniques taught in pediatric dental
residency programs, J Dent Child 80(1):31–35, 2013.
16.	Milnes AR: Is formocresol obsolete? A fresh look at the evidence concerning safety issues, Pediatr Dent 30(3):237–246,
2008.
17.	García-Godoy F, et al.: Pulpal response to different application times of formocresol, J Pedod 6:176–193, 1982.
18.	Fernandez CC, et al.: Clinical and radiographic outcomes of
the use of four dressing materials in pulpotomized primary
molars: a randomized clinical trial with 2-year follow-up, Int
J Paed Dent 23:400–407, 2013.
19.	Hibbard ED, Ireland RL: Morphology of the root canals of the
primary molar teeth, J Dent Child 24:250–257, 1957.
20.	Aminabadi NA, et al.: Study of root canal accessibility in human primary molars, J Oral Sci 50(1):69–74, 2008.
21.	da Costa CC, et al.: Endodontics in primary molars using ultrasonic instrumentation, J Dent Child 75(1):20–23,
2008.
22.	Bodur H, et al.: Accuracy of two different apex locators in
primary teeth with and without root resorption, Clin Oral
Invest 12(2):137–141, 2008.
23.	Holan G, Fuks AB: A comparison of pulpectomies using ZOE
and KRI paste in primary molars: a retrospective study, Pediatr Dent 15:403–407, 1993.
24.	Ranly DM, García-Godoy F: Current and potential pulp
therapies for primary and young permanent teeth, J Dent
28:153–161, 2000.
25.	Ritwik P: A review of pulp therapy for primary and immature
permanent teeth, Calif Dent Assoc J 41:585–594, 2013.
26.	García-Godoy F: Evaluation of an iodoform paste in root canal therapy for infected primary teeth, J Dent Child 54:30–34,
1987.
27.	Rifkin A: A simple, effective, safe technique for the root canal treatment of abscessed primary teeth, J Dent Child 47:
435–441, 1980.
28.	Rifkin A: The root canal treatment of abscessed primary teeth—a three to four year follow-up, J Dent Child 49:
428–431, 1982.
29.	Nurko C, García-Godoy F: Evaluation of the calcium hydroxide/iodoform paste (Vitapex) in root canal therapy for primary teeth, J Clin Pediatr Dent 23:289–294, 1999.
30.	American Academy of Pediatric Dentistry: Special issue: reference manual 2013-2014, Pediatr Dent 35(6 suppl):235–242,
2013.
31.	Chen JW, Jorden M: Materials for primary tooth pulp treatment: the present and the future, Endo Topics 23:41–49,
2012.
32.	Herman B: Organic Root Canal Treatment, Frankfurt, Germany, 1936, W Kramer.
33.	Doyle WA, et al.: Formocresol versus calcium hydroxide in
pulpotomy, J Dent Child 29:86–97, 1962.
34.	Fuks AB, et al.: Pulp response to ferric sulfate, diluted formocresol and IRM in pulpotomized primary baboon teeth,
J Dent Child 64:254–259, 1997.
35.	Fuks AB, et al.: Ferric sulfate versus dilute formocresol in
pulpotomized primary molars: long-term follow-up, Pediatr
Dent 19:327–330, 1997.
36.	Casas MJ, et al.: Two-year outcomes of primary molar ferric sulfate pulpotomy and root canal therapy, Pediatr Dent
25(2):97–102, 2003.
37.	Celik B, et al.: A randomized trial of mineral trioxide aggregate cements in primary tooth pulpotomies, J Dent Child
80(3):126–132, 2013.

241

38.	Dickey DM, et al.: Pulp reactions to a calcium hydroxyapatite in monkeys, J Dent Res 59(Spec Iss A):360, 1980 (abstract
371).
39.	Ibarra AJ: Pulp reactions to a synthetic hydroxyapatite and
chlorhexidine in monkeys [Master’s thesis], Indianapolis, 1980,
Indiana University School of Dentistry.
40.	Fadavi S, et al.: Freeze-dried bone in pulpotomy procedures
in monkeys, J Pedod 13:108–122, 1989.
41.	Thomas GP, et al.: Histologic study of pulp capping using
chlorhexidine in dogs, NDA J 46:17–20, 1995.
42.	Prabhu NT, Munshi AK: Clinical, radiographic and histological observations of the radicular pulp following “feracrylum”
pulpotomy, J Clin Pediatr Dent 21:151–156, 1997.
43.	Higashi T, Okamoto H: Influence of particle size of calcium
phosphate ceramics as a capping agent on the formation of
a hard tissue barrier in amputated dental pulp, J Endod 22:
281–283, 1996.
44.	Yoshimine Y, Maeda K: Histologic evaluation of tetracalcium
phosphate–based cement as a direct pulp-capping agent,
Oral Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol Oral Radiol Endod 79:351–358,
1995.
45.	Cox CF, et al.: Biocompatibility of primer, adhesive and resin composite systems on non-exposed and exposed pulps of
non-human primate teeth, Am J Dent 11(Spec Iss):S55–S63,
1988.
46.	Cox CF, Suzuki S: Re-evaluating pulp protection: calcium
hydroxide liners vs. cohesive hybridization, J Am Dent Assoc
125:823–831, 1994.
47.	Pameijer CH, Stanley HR: The disastrous effects of the “total
etch” technique in vital pulp capping in primates, Am J Dent
11(Spec Iss):S45–S54, 1988.
48.	Ford TR, et al.: Using mineral trioxide aggregate as a pulp
capping material, J Am Dent Assoc 127:1491–1494, 1996.
49.	Rutherford B, Fitzgerald M: A new biological approach to vital pulp therapy, Crit Rev Oral Biol Med 6:218–229, 1995.
50.	Jepsen S, et al.: Recombinant human osteogenic protein-1
induces dentin formation: an experimental study in miniature swine, J Endod 23:378–382, 1997.
51.	Calland JW, et al.: Human pulp cells respond to calcitonin
gene–related peptide in vitro, J Endod 23:485–489, 1997.
52.	Ranly DM: Pulpotomy therapy in primary teeth: new modalities for old rationales, Pediatr Dent 16:403–409, 1994.
53.	Sabbarini J, et al.: Histological evaluation of enamel matrix
derivative as a pulpotomy agent in primary teeth, Pediatr
Dent 29(6):475–479, 2007.
54.	Sabbarini J, et al.: Comparison of enamel matrix derivative
versus formocresol as pulpotomy agents in the primary dentition, J Endod 34(3):284–287, 2008.
55.	Ruemping DR, et al.: Electrosurgical pulpotomy in primates—a comparison with formocresol pulpotomy, Pediatr
Dent 5:14–18, 1983.
56.	Shaw DW, et al.: Electrosurgical pulpotomy: a 6-month
study in primates, J Endod 13:500–505, 1987.
57.	Mack RB, Dean JA: Electrosurgical pulpotomy: a retrospective human study, J Dent Child 60:107–114, 1993.
58.	Dean J, et al.: Comparison of electrosurgical and formocresol pulpotomy procedures in children, Int J Paediatr Dent
12:177–182, 2002.
59.	Rivera N, et al.: Pulpal therapy for primary teeth: formocresol
vs electrosurgery: a clinical study, J Dent Child 70(1):71–73,
2003.
60.	Fishman SA, et al.: Success of electrofulguration pulpotomies
covered by zinc oxide and eugenol or calcium hydroxide: a
clinical study, Pediatr Dent 18:385–390, 1996.
61.	Shoji S, et al.: Histopathological changes in dental pulps irradiated by CO2 laser: a preliminary report on laser pulpotomy, J Endod 11:379–384, 1985.

242

Chapter 13

n

Treatment of Deep Caries, Vital Pulp Exposure, and Pulpless Teeth

62.	Wilkerson MK, et al.: Effects of the argon laser on primary
tooth pulpotomies in swine, J Clin Laser Med Surg 14:37–42,
1996.
63.	Moritz A, et al.: The CO2 laser as an aid in direct pulp capping, J Endod 24:248–251, 1998.
64.	De Coster P, et al.: Laser-assisted pulpotomy in primary teeth:
a systematic review, Int J Paediatr Dent 23:389–399, 2013.
65.	Fuks AB: Vital pulp therapy with new materials for primary
teeth: new directions and treatment perspectives, Pediatr
Dent 30(3):211–219, 2008.

66.	Lin P-Y, et al.: Primary molar pulpotomy: a systematic review and network meta-analysis, J Dent 42(9):1060–1077,
2014.
67.	Dunston B, Coll JA: A survey of primary tooth pulp therapy
as taught in US dental schools and practiced by diplomates
of the American Board of Pediatric Dentistry, Pediatr Dent
30(1):42–48, 2008.
68.	Watts A, Paterson RC: Bacterial contamination as a factor
influencing the toxicity of materials to the exposed dental
pulp, Oral Surg 64:466–474, 1987.

CHAPTER

14

Gingivitis and
Periodontal Disease
s Vanchit John, James A. Weddell, Daniel E. Shin, and James E. Jones

For additional resources, please visit the

website.

CHAPTER OUTLINE
ERUPTION GINGIVITIS
DENTAL PLAQUE–INDUCED
GINGIVITIS
ALLERGY AND GINGIVAL
INFLAMMATION
ACUTE GINGIVAL DISEASE
Herpes Simplex Virus Infection
Recurrent Aphthous Ulcer (Canker
Sore)
Necrotizing Ulcerative Gingivitis
(Vincent Infection)
Acute Candidiasis (Thrush,
Candidosis, Moniliasis)
Acute Bacterial Infections
CHRONIC NONSPECIFIC GINGIVITIS
CHLORHEXIDINE AS A THERAPEUTIC
PLAQUE CONTROL AGENT
GINGIVAL DISEASES MODIFIED BY
SYSTEMIC FACTORS
Gingival Diseases Associated with
the Endocrine System
Gingival Lesions of Genetic Origin

T

Phenytoin-Induced Gingival
Overgrowth
Ascorbic Acid Deficiency Gingivitis
(Scorbutic Gingivitis)
PERIODONTAL DISEASES
IN CHILDREN
Aggressive Periodontitis (Early-Onset
Periodontitis)
Generalized Aggressive Periodontitis
Localized Aggressive Periodontitis
(Localized Juvenile Periodontitis)
Treatment of Aggressive
Periodontitis
PERIODONTITIS AS
A MANIFESTATION
OF SYSTEMIC DISEASE
Premature Bone Loss in the Primary
Dentition
Papillon-Lefèvre Syndrome
Gingival Recession
Self-Mutilation
Abnormal Frenum Attachment

he gingiva is the part of the oral mucous membrane
that covers the alveolar processes and the cervical
portions of the teeth. It has been traditionally divided into free and attached gingiva. The free gingiva is
the tissue coronal to the bottom of the gingival sulcus.
The attached gingiva extends apically from the free gingival groove to the mucogingival junction.
The gingival tissues are normally light pink, although
the color may be related to the complexion of the person,
the thickness of the tissue, and the degree of keratinization. The gingival color of the young child may be more
reddish due to increased vascularity and thinner epithelium. The surface of the gingiva of a child appears less
stippled or smoother than that of an adult. In the healthy
adult, the marginal gingiva has a sharp, knifelike edge.
During the period of tooth eruption in the child, however, the gingivae are thicker and have rounded margins
due to the migration and cervical constriction of the primary teeth.
Delaney reports probing depths around primary teeth to
be approximately 2 mm, with the facial and lingual probe
sites shallower than the proximal sites.1 The periodontal

Frenotomy and Frenectomy
Techniques for Mandibular
Frenectomy and Vestibular Depth
Increase
Free Gingival Autograft Procedure
Lasers
CLINICAL ASSESSMENT OF ORAL
CLEANLINESS AND PERIODONTAL
DISEASE
Plaque Control Record
Periodontal Screening
and Recording
EXTRINSIC STAINS AND DEPOSITS
ON TEETH
Green Stain
Orange Stain
Black Stain
Removal of Extrinsic Stains
Pigmentation Caused by Stannous
Fluoride Application
CALCULUS

ligament in children is wider than that in adults. The width
of the attached gingiva is narrower in the mandible than in
the maxilla, and both widths increase with the transition
from the primary to permanent dentition in the child. The
alveolar bone surrounding the primary dentition demonstrates fewer trabeculae, less calcification, and larger marrow spaces.
Recent recognition that periodontal disease may have
its origins in childhood has led dentists to be more aggressive in treatment. Studies confirm a high prevalence
of gingival inflammation in children. Periodontal conditions that progress rapidly and result in the loss of primary and permanent teeth have been noted with increased
frequency.2 Therefore the American Academy of Pediatric
Dentistry’s recommendations for children and adolescents include placing greater emphasis on the prevention,
early diagnosis, and treatment of gingival and periodontal disease in children.3 By the establishment of excellent
oral hygiene habits in children, which will carry over to
adulthood, the risk of periodontal disease is lowered.
Gingivitis is inflammation involving only the gingival tissues surrounding the tooth. Microscopically, it is
243

244

Chapter 14

n

Gingivitis and Periodontal Disease

characterized by the presence of an inflammatory exudate
and edema, some destruction of collagenous gingival fibers,
and ulceration and proliferation of the epithelium facing
the tooth and attaching the gingiva to it. Numerous studies
indicate that marginal gingivitis is the most common form
of periodontal disease and starts in early childhood.
Severe gingivitis is relatively uncommon in children,
although numerous surveys have shown that a large portion of the pediatric population has mild gingivitis. The
major etiologic factors associated with gingivitis and more
significant periodontal disease are uncalcified and calcified bacterial plaque. However, gingivitis rarely progresses
to periodontitis in the preschool and grade school child.
Bacterial plaque, which is composed of soft bacterial deposits that adhere firmly to the teeth, is considered to be a
complex, metabolically interconnected, highly organized
bacterial system consisting of dense masses of microorganisms embedded in an intermicrobial matrix (biofilm). In
sufficient concentration it can disturb the host-parasite relationship and cause dental caries and periodontal disease.
Eastcott and Stallard have observed that plaque begins
to form within 2 hours after the teeth are brushed.4 Coccal
forms of bacteria appear first on a thin fenestrated pellicle
(organic bacteria-free film deposited on the tooth surface).
The surface is completely covered with a smooth material
3 hours after teeth are brushed. Within 5 hours, plaque
microcolonies develop, apparently by cell division. Between
6 and 12 hours the covering material becomes thinner
and is reduced to discontinuous small scattered areas.
About 30% of the cocci are in various stages of division by
24 hours. Rod-shaped bacteria appear for the first time in
the 24-hour-old plaque. Within 48 hours the surface of the
plaque is covered with a mass of rods and filaments.
Dental calculus, which is considered to be a calcified
dental plaque, is discussed later in the chapter. It is classified as supragingival or subgingival, depending on its
location on the tooth. Supragingival calculus presents
as hard, firmly adherent masses on the enamel of teeth,
whereas subgingival calculus is found as a concretion on
the tooth in the confines of the periodontal pocket. The
surface of dental calculus is always covered by an uncalcified plaque. Calculus is an important factor in the development of gingival and periodontal disease.
Suomi and colleagues, in a study of approximately 1700
children from 9 to 14 years of age, found that a relatively
high percentage of children of all racial-ethnic groups had
calculus (both supragingival and subgingival).5 From 56%
to 85% of the children in the various age, gender, and
racial-ethnic groups had supragingival calculus. The findings of this study indicated that most children from 9 to
14 years of age who are of low socioeconomic status would
benefit from inclusion in a preventive periodontal disease
program based on the improvement of oral hygiene.

ERUPTION GINGIVITIS
A transitory type of gingivitis is often observed in young
children when the primary teeth are erupting. This
gingivitis, often localized and associated with difficult
eruption, subsides after the teeth emerge into the oral
cavity.

Figure 14-1 Mild inflammation (arrow) is evident in the

tissue partially covering the crown of the erupting first
permanent molar.

Weddell and Klein conducted a study to determine the
prevalence of gingivitis in a group of children between
6 and 36 months of age.6 The children, patients of pediatricians in the Indianapolis area, had been born in the area,
which has a fluoridated water supply. Among 299 white
children, gingivitis was present in 13% of those from 6 to
17 months of age, 34% of those in the 18- to 23-month
age group, and 39% of those in the 24- to 36-month age
group. African-American children were not included in the
study because of the inconsistency of their gingival colors.
The gingivitis observed by Weddell and Klein was, for the
most part, eruption gingivitis. Nevertheless, their findings
support the view that an oral hygiene program should be
initiated by parents when the child is very young.
The greatest increase in the incidence of gingivitis in
children is often seen in the 6- to 7-year age group, when
the permanent teeth begin to erupt. This increase in gingivitis apparently occurs because the gingival margin
receives no protection from the coronal contour of the
tooth during the early stage of active eruption, and the
continual impingement of food on the gingivae exacerbates the inflammatory process.
Food debris, materia alba, and bacterial plaque often
collect around and beneath the free gingival tissue, partially cover the crown of the erupting tooth, and cause
the development of an inflammatory process (Fig. 14-1).
This inflammation is most commonly associated with the
eruption of the first and second permanent molars, and
the condition can be painful and can develop into pericoronitis or a pericoronal abscess. Mild eruption gingivitis
requires no treatment other than improved oral hygiene.
Painful pericoronitis may be helped when the area is irrigated with a counterirritant, such as Peroxyl (ColgatePalmolive Co., New York, New York, United States).
Pericoronitis accompanied by swelling and lymph node
involvement should be treated with antibiotic therapy.

DENTAL PLAQUE–INDUCED GINGIVITIS
The degree of dental cleanliness and the condition of the
gingival tissues in children are related. Horowitz and associates observed significant improvements in the gingivitis

Chapter 14

n

Gingivitis and Periodontal Disease

245

A

Figure 14-2 Gingivitis resulting from poor oral hygiene

and reduced function in the area. A painful second primary
molar has interfered with normal function on this side of
the mouth.
scores of schoolchildren after the initiation of a supervised
daily plaque removal program.7 Children in grades 5 to
8 participated in the program, and successful results were
maintained during three school years. The mean gingivitis
scores were reduced 40% among girls and 17% among boys
during the program period, whereas the children in the control group maintained essentially the same gingivitis scores
for the period of the study. Adequate mouth hygiene and
cleanliness of the teeth are related to frequency of brushing and the thoroughness with which bacterial plaque is removed from the teeth. Favorable occlusion and the chewing
of coarse, detergent-type foods, such as raw carrots, celery,
and apples, have a beneficial effect on oral cleanliness.
In a study of 2876 children residing in a naturally
fluoridated area, Murray confirmed the high prevalence
of gingivitis in the young population.8 He observed that
inflammation of one or more papillae or margins associated with the incisor and canine teeth occurred in 90%
of children from 8 to 18 years of age. He also pointed to
the importance of a good standard of oral cleanliness in
reducing gingivitis and, thereby, in preventing the progression of the disease in later life.
Gingivitis associated with poor oral hygiene is usually classified as early (slight), moderate, or advanced.
Early gingivitis is quickly reversible and can be treated
with good oral prophylactic treatment and instruction in
toothbrushing and flossing techniques to keep the teeth
free of bacterial plaque (Figs. 14-2 and 14-3, A and B). Gingivitis is generally less severe in children than in adults
with similar plaque levels.

ALLERGY AND GINGIVAL
INFLAMMATION
Matsson and Moller studied the degree of seasonal variation of gingival inflammation in children with allergies to
birch pollen.9 Thirty-four children who were allergic were
examined during two successive spring seasons and the
one intervening fall. Age- and gender-matched controls
were also examined in the fall. Gingival inflammation
and the presence or absence of plaque were recorded, and

B
Figure 14-3 A, Localized gingival inflammation and reces-

sion associated with minimal plaque accumulation on mandibular right central incisor. B, Gingival health was greatly
improved after a thorough plaque removal regimen was
initiated at home.

a bleeding/plaque ratio was calculated for each child. The
results indicated an enhanced gingival inflammatory reaction in the allergic children during the pollen seasons.
Although the authors acknowledge that the significance
of gingival reaction during short allergy seasons is difficult to assess, they speculate that patients with complex
allergies who have symptoms for longer periods may be
at higher risk for more significant adverse periodontal
changes.

ACUTE GINGIVAL DISEASE
HERPES SIMPLEX VIRUS INFECTION
Herpes virus causes one of the most widespread viral infections. The primary infection usually occurs in a child
younger than 6 years of age who has had no contact with
the type 1 herpes simplex virus (HSV-1) and who therefore has no neutralizing antibodies. It is believed that
99% of all primary infections are of the subclinical type.
The infection may also occur in susceptible adults who
have not had a primary infection (Fig. 14-4).
In some preschool children the primary infection may
be characterized by only one or two mild sores on the oral
mucous membranes, which may be of little concern to the
child or may go unnoticed by the parents. In other children the primary infection may be manifested by acute
symptoms (acute herpetic gingivostomatitis). The active

246

Chapter 14

n

Gingivitis and Periodontal Disease

Figure 14-4 Ulcerated stage of primary herpes in a young

adult. Notice the circumscribed confluent areas of inflammation.
symptoms of the acute disease can occur in children with
clean mouths and healthy oral tissues. The symptoms of
the disease develop suddenly and include, in addition to
the fiery red gingival tissues, malaise, irritability, headache, and pain associated with the intake of food and liquids of acidic content. A characteristic oral finding in the
acute primary disease is the presence of yellow or white
liquid-filled vesicles. In a few days the vesicles rupture
and form painful ulcers, 1 to 3 mm in diameter, which
are covered with a whitish gray membrane and have a
circumscribed area of inflammation (Fig. 14-5, A and B).
The ulcers may be observed on any area of the mucous
membrane, including buccal mucosa, tongue, lips, hard
and soft palate, and the tonsillar areas. Large ulcerated
lesions may occasionally be observed on the palate or gingival tissues or in the region of the mucobuccal fold. This
distribution makes the differential diagnosis more difficult. An additional diagnostic criterion is a fourfold rise of
serum antibodies to HSV-1. The lesion culture also shows
positive results for HSV-1.
Treatment of acute herpetic gingivostomatitis in children, which runs a course of 10 to 14 days, should include
specific antiviral medication and provision for the relief
of the acute symptoms so that fluid and nutritional intake
can be maintained. The application of a mild topical anesthetic, such as dyclonine hydrochloride (0.5%) (Dyclone),
before mealtime temporarily relieves the pain and allows
the child to eat soft food. Another topical anesthetic, lidocaine (Xylocaine Viscous), can be prescribed for the child
who can hold 1 teaspoon of the anesthetic in the mouth
for 2 to 3 minutes and then expectorate the solution.
Schaaf recommends, as an alternative to the anesthetic,
a mixture of equal parts of diphenhydramine (Benadryl)
elixir and Kaopectate.10 This material can be compounded by the pharmacist or mixed by the parent. Diphenhydramine has mild analgesic and anti-inflammatory
properties, whereas the kaolin-pectin compound coats
the lesions. Because fruit juices are usually irritating to the
ulcerated area, ingestion of a vitamin supplement during
the course of the disease is indicated.
Although the treatments described may be useful, they
are only palliative. The mainstay of definitive therapy
is regular doses of specific systemic antiviral medication

A

B
Figure 14-5 A, Acute herpetic gingivostomatitis on the

tongue in a child. B, Fiery red gingival tissues are characteristic findings.

combined with systemic analgesics (acetaminophen or
ibuprofen) during the course of the disease. The antiviral
medications currently available are acyclovir, famciclovir,
and valacyclovir. These medications inhibit viral replication in cells infected with the virus. Acyclovir (Zovirax;
GlaxoSmithKline, Inc., Research Triangle Park, North Carolina, United States) should be administered in five daily
doses to equal 1000 mg per day for 10 days. Acyclovir
is available in capsules or suspension. Acyclovir therapy
has been successfully used in infants and children.11 Famciclovir (Famvir; Novartis Pharmaceuticals Corporation,
East Hanover, New Jersey, United States) and valacyclovir
(Valtrex; GlaxoSmithKline, Inc.) are newer and possibly
more effective antiviral agents, but their use in pediatric
populations has not yet been studied. The Food and Drug
Administration (FDA)-approved treatment for recurrent
herpes simplex labialis (RHL) in children 12 years of age
and older is valacyclovir 2 g, initially, and 2 g 12 hours
later. Famciclovir (one 1500-g dose) with prodrome (at
the earliest sign of the lesions) is an FDA-approved treatment for herpes simplex labialis in adults, but it has not
been studied in children. Bed rest and isolation from other children in the family are also recommended. Hale and
colleagues reported an outbreak of herpes simplex infection in a group of 13 children occupying one floor in an

Chapter 14

orphanage.12 The children ranged in age from 11 to 35
months. In three of the children, a mild fever of brief duration and small oral lesions were the only signs of infection; these might easily have been missed in a situation
different from that of an institutional study. The remaining children had symptoms of acute infection.
After the initial primary attack during early childhood,
the herpes simplex virus becomes inactive and resides in
sensory nerve ganglia. The virus often reappears later as
the familiar cold sore or fever blister, usually on the outside of the lips (Fig. 14-6, A-C). Thus the disease has been
commonly referred to as recurrent herpes labialis (RHL).
However, approximately 5% of recurrences are intraoral.
With the recurring attacks, the sores develop in essentially the same area. Kleinman and colleagues published the
results of a national survey of 39,206 schoolchildren aged
from 5 to 17 years.13 A history of RHL was reported by
33% of the children.
The recurrence of the disease has often been related to
conditions of emotional stress and lowered tissue resistance resulting from various types of trauma. Excessive
exposure to sunlight may be responsible for the appearance of the recurrent herpetic lesions on the lip. Use of
sunscreen can prevent sun-induced recurrences. Lesions
on the lip may also appear after dental treatment and
may be related to irritation from rubber dam material or
even routine daily procedures.
The most effective treatment for these recurrences
is the use of the specific systemic antiviral medications
already discussed in connection with the treatment of
the primary herpetic infection (acyclovir, famciclovir,
and valacyclovir). The medication should be taken immediately after the prodromal symptom of recurrence.
The daily dosages are the same as those for the primary
infection, but the course of treatment is usually 5 days
instead of 10. One-day therapy for RHL is a total of 4 g
valacyclovir given in two divided doses: 2 g initially with
the prodrome, followed 12 hours later with another 2 g.
This regimen has been approved for children 12 years of
age and older. Another topical antiviral agent, penciclovir
cream (Denavir; Novartis Consumer Health, Inc., Parsippany, New Jersey, United States), may be applied to perioral lesions but should not be applied to intraoral lesions.
The penciclovir cream and systemic antivirals should not
be prescribed for concurrent use. The penciclovir cream
can be applied for 4 days, every 2 hours while the patient
is awake, and it is approved for use in children 12 years
of age and older. Topical 5% acyclovir cream may be prescribed for use 5 times daily for 4 days in children 12 years
of age and older.
Other remedies for herpes simplex infection also include the amino acid lysine. The oral therapy is based on
lysine’s antagonistic effect on another amino acid, arginine. Griffith and associates conducted an initial study
in which 250 patients were given daily lysine doses of
1000 mg and were told to avoid eating arginine-rich
foods, such as chocolate and nuts.14 The lysine therapy
was continued until the patients had been lesion-free for
6 months. l-Lysine monohydrochloride is available commercially in capsule form or in tablets containing 100 or
312 mg of l-Lysine (General Nutrition Corp., Pittsburgh,

n

Gingivitis and Periodontal Disease

247

A

B

C
Figure 14-6 Recurrent herpes labialis. A, Early vesicular le-

sions. B, Mature vesicular lesion. C, Appearance of herpes
labialis after rupture of vesicles and crusting of the lesion.
(Courtesy of Dr. Susan L. Zunt.)

Pennsylvania, United States). The patients reported that
pain disappeared overnight in virtually every instance.
New vesicles failed to appear, and a majority considered
the resolution of the lesions to be more rapid than in
the past. There was also a reduction in frequency of occurrences in some patients. Griffith and colleagues concluded that improper food selection may make adequate
lysine intake precarious for some persons.14 Ingestion of
cereals, seeds, nuts, and chocolate would produce a high
arginine/lysine ratio and favor the development of herpetic lesions. Similar results are obtained when arginine is

248

Chapter 14

n

Gingivitis and Periodontal Disease

Figure 14-7 Primary herpetic infection involving the dorsal

surface of the thumb of a 3-year-old child. An acute primary
infection was present in the mouth.
Figure 14-8 Evidence of the development of a recurrent

added to the medium in the laboratory to induce herpes
proliferation. The avoidance of these foods, coupled with
the selection of foods with adequate lysine, such as dairy
products and yeast, should discourage herpes infection.
These authors postulate that this may explain the low incidence of herpes in infants before they are weaned from
a predominantly milk diet. Prophylactic lysine is apparently useful in managing selected cases of RHL if serum
lysine is maintained at adequate concentrations.
Brooks and associates have reported that dentists are
frequently exposed to HSV-1.15 They evaluated the risk of
infection with the virus by assessing disease experience,
comparing the individual’s history with the results of a
complement fixation or antibody titration test, or both.
Their study group consisted of 525 dental students, 94
dental faculty members, and 23 staff members. Although
almost all of those with a history of herpetic infection
showed antibodies to HSV-1, only 57% of those lacking
such a history had neutralizing antibody titers of 1:10 or
higher. This finding suggests that a significant number of
practicing dentists risk primary herpetic infection. Consequently, dentists and dental auxiliaries without a history
of herpetic lesions might benefit from serologic testing.
Considering the occupational disability that often accompanies HSV-1 infection of the finger or eye, effective barrier protection for health professionals is important.
Primary herpetic infection has been observed on the dorsal surface of the thumb of a pediatric patient (Fig. 14-7).
The child was a thumb sucker, and the acute primary infection was present in the mouth. The dorsal surface of the
thumb, which rested on the mandibular incisor teeth, apparently became irritated, and an inoculation of the virus took
place. The oral condition and the lesions on the thumb subsided in 2 weeks.

RECURRENT APHTHOUS ULCER (CANKER SORE)
The recurrent aphthous ulcer (RAU)—also referred to as
recurrent aphthous stomatitis (RAS)—is a painful ulceration on the unattached mucous membrane that occurs
in school-aged children and adults. The peak age for RAU
is between 10 and 19 years of age. It has been reported
to be the most common mucosal disorder in people of
all ages and races in the world. This disorder, according

aphthous ulcer in the mucobuccal fold above the primary
canine. An area of inflammation and vesicle formation is
apparent (arrow).
to definitions adopted in the epidemiologic literature, is
characterized by recurrent ulcerations on the moist mucous membranes of the mouth, in which both discrete
and confluent lesions form rapidly in certain sites and
feature a round to oval crateriform base, raised reddened
margins, and pain. They may appear as attacks of minor
or single, major or multiple, or herpetiform lesions. They
may or may not be associated with ulcerative lesions elsewhere.16 In the national survey reported by Kleinman and
colleagues, a history of RAU was reported by 37% of the
schoolchildren and occurred approximately three times
more often in white than in African-American schoolchildren.13 Ship and colleagues reported the prevalence estimates of RAU to range between 2% and 50%, with most
estimates between 5% and 25% (among medical and dental students, estimated prevalence is between 50% and
60%).17 Lesions persist for 4 to 12 days and heal uneventfully, leaving scars only rarely and only in cases of unusually large lesions. The description of RAU frequently
includes the term canker sores (Fig. 14-8). The major form
(RAS) is less common and has been referred to as periadenitis mucosa necrotica recurrens and Sutton disease. RAS
has been associated with other systemic diseases: PFAPA
(periodic fever, aphthous stomatitis, pharyngitis, adenitis), Behçet disease, Crohn disease, ulcerative colitis, celiac disease, neutropenia, immunodeficiency syndromes,
Reiter’s syndrome, systemic lupus erythematosus, and
MAGIC (mouth and genital ulcers with inflamed cartilage)
syndrome.
The cause of RAU is unknown. Local and systemic conditions along with a genetic predisposition and immunologic and infectious microbial factors have been identified
as potential causes. The condition may be caused by a
delayed hypersensitivity to the L form of Streptococcus sanguis, which is a common constituent of the normal oral
microbiota of humans. It is also possible that the lesions
are caused by an autoimmune reaction of the oral epithelium. Epidemiologic studies by Ship and colleagues provide evidence for this hypothesis.17 Analysis of these data

Chapter 14

indicates that both RHL and RAU may be produced by the
same mechanism, despite the known infectious agent of
RHL and the absence of any known virus for RAU. Scully
and Porter reported strong associations with interleukin
genotypes.16
Local factors include trauma, allergy to toothpaste
constituents (sodium lauryl sulfate), and salivary gland
dysfunction. In a review of the clinical problem, Antoon
and Miller suggested that minor trauma is a common precipitating factor, accounting for as many as 75% of the
episodes.18 Injuries caused by cheek biting and minor facial irritations are probably the most common precipitating factors. Nutritional deficiencies are found in 20% of
persons with aphthous ulcers. The clinically detectable
deficiencies include deficiencies of iron, vitamin B12, and
folic acid. Stress may prove to be an important precipitating factor, particularly in stress-prone groups, such as
students in professional schools and military personnel.
According to Greenspan and colleagues, either nonspecific factors (trauma, food allergy) or specific factors
(bacterial or viral infection) may trigger a temporary imbalance in various cell subpopulations.19 This imbalance
could then upset immune regulation and result in local
destruction of the oral epithelium and thus ulceration.
Ship and colleagues also suggested herpes simplex virus,
human herpesvirus type 6, cytomegalovirus, EpsteinBarr virus, and varicella-zoster virus as possible causes of
RAS.17 Current treatment is focused on promoting ulcer
healing, reducing ulcer duration and patient pain, maintaining the patient’s nutritional intake, and preventing or
reducing the frequency of recurrence of the disease.
Numerous treatments have been recommended for
RAU, but a completely successful therapy has not been
found. Topical anti-inflammatory and analgesic medicines and/or systemic immunomodulatory and immunosuppressive agents have been used for RAU. The primary
line of treatment uses topical gels, creams, and ointments
as anti-inflammatory agents. Currently, a topical corticosteroid (e.g., 0.5% fluocinonide, 0.025% triamcinolone,
or 0.5% clobetasol) is applied to the area with a mucosal adherent (e.g., isobutyl cyanoacrylate, Orabase). For
example, the application of triamcinolone acetonide
(Kenalog in Orabase) to the surfaces of the lesions before
meals and before sleeping may also be helpful. Binnie and
colleagues reported that an anti-inflammatory and antiallergic medication in the form of a topical paste is effective in reducing pain and accelerating healing of RAU
ulcers.20 The active ingredient in the paste is 5% amlexanox (Aphthasol; Access Pharmaceuticals, Dallas, Texas,
United States). The paste is applied to the ulcer 4 times
daily, after meals and at bedtime, until the ulcer heals.
Zilactin (Zila Pharmaceuticals, Phoenix, Arizona, United
States), a topical paste with hydroxypropyl cellulose film,
has also been used to adhere to the mucosa and cover the
ulcer while providing pain relief for an extended period
of time. Occlusive topical 2-otylcyanoacrylate adheres for
6 hours. Aloe vera freeze-dried gel extract adheres and
forms an occlusive protective patch. In severe cases oral
prednisone has been prescribed.
Topical rinses have also been helpful for the relief
of RAU. Sucralfate has proved useful by its property of

n

Gingivitis and Periodontal Disease

249

coating the affected area. The topical application of
tetracycline to the ulcers is often helpful in reducing
the pain and in shortening the course of the disease. A
mouthwash containing suspension of one of the tetracyclines has been helpful to some, but the mouthwash
should not be swallowed. Chlorhexidine (CH) mouthwash has also been known to alleviate the symptoms
of RAU. Dexamethasone elixir when swished is useful
to treat ulcerations in areas of the mouth that are difficult to access. Meiller and associates have reported that
the duration and severity of RAU lesions can be significantly reduced by vigorous twice-daily rinsing with an
antimicrobial mouthwash (Listerine Antiseptic; Pfizer
Warner Lambert Division, Morris Plains, New Jersey,
United States).21

NECROTIZING ULCERATIVE GINGIVITIS
(VINCENT INFECTION)
The infectious disease commonly referred to as acute
necrotizing ulcerative gingivitis (NUG) is rare among preschool children in the United States. The condition occurs occasionally in children from 6 to 12 years old, and
is more commonly seen in young adults.
NUG can be easily diagnosed because of the involvement of the interproximal papillae and the presence of a
pseudomembranous necrotic covering of the marginal tissue (Fig. 14-9). Prevotella intermedia, Fusobacterium, Treponema, and Selenomonas species are several predominant
microorganisms that have been found in the microflora
of NUG lesions. The clinical manifestations of the disease
include inflamed, painful, bleeding gingival tissue, poor
appetite, temperature as high as 40°C (104°F), general
malaise, and a fetid odor.
The disease responds dramatically within 24 to 48
hours to subgingival curettage, debridement, and the
use of mild oxidizing solutions. If the gingival tissues are
acutely and extensively inflamed when the patient is first
seen, antibiotic therapy is indicated. Improved oral hygiene, the use of mild oxidizing mouthrinses after each
meal, and twice-daily rinsing with CH will aid in overcoming the infection.
There should be no difficulty in distinguishing NUG
from acute herpetic gingivostomatitis, although the two
are sometimes confused. Round ulcers with red areolae
on the lips and cheeks are characteristic of herpetic gingivostomatitis. Therapeutic prophylaxis and debridement
bring about a favorable response in cases of NUG but not
in acute herpetic gingivostomatitis. A therapeutic trial of
antibiotics reduces the acute symptoms in NUG but not
in the viral infection. Acute herpetic gingivostomatitis is
most frequently seen in preschool children, and its onset is rapid, whereas, as stated earlier, NUG rarely occurs
in the preschool-aged group and develops over a longer
period, usually in a mouth in which irritants and poor
oral hygiene are present. On the other hand, acute oral
infections initially diagnosed as NUG have frequently
been found later to be an oral manifestation of one of
the xanthomatoses. The early stages of conditions such
as Hand-Schüller-Christian disease and Langerhands cell
histiocytosis are associated with many of the symptoms
of NUG.

250

Chapter 14

n

Gingivitis and Periodontal Disease

A

A

B

B

Figure 14-9 A, A rare example of necrotizing ulcerative

Figure 14-10 A, The characteristic appearance of acute
candidiasis on the upper and lower lips of a young patient.
B, The hard and soft palates were also severely affected. The
infection was controlled with a 7-day regimen of nystatin.

gingivitis in an 8-year-old boy. B, Local treatment and
improved oral hygiene produced a dramatic recovery from
the infection.

ACUTE CANDIDIASIS (THRUSH, CANDIDOSIS,
MONILIASIS)
Candida (Monilia) albicans is a common inhabitant of the
oral cavity but may multiply rapidly and cause a pathogenic
state when host resistance is lowered. Young children sometimes develop thrush after local antibiotic therapy, which allows the fungus to proliferate. The lesions of oral candidiasis
appear as raised, furry white patches, which can be removed
easily to produce a bleeding underlying surface (Fig. 14-10,
A and B). Neonatal candidiasis, contracted during passage
through the vagina and erupting clinically during the first 2
weeks of life, is a common occurrence. This infection is also
common in immunosuppressed patients (see Chapter 26).
Antifungal antibiotics control thrush. For infants and
very young children, a suspension of 1 mL (100,000 units)
of nystatin (Mycostatin) may be dropped into the mouth
for local action 4 times a day. Nystatin is nonirritating
and nontoxic. Clotrimazole suspension (10 mg/mL), 1 to
2 mL applied to affected areas 4 times daily, is an effective
antifungal medication. Systemic fluconazole suspension
(10 mg/mL) is safe to use in infants at a total dosage of up
to 6 mg/kg/day. For children old enough to manage solid
medications allowed to dissolve in the mouth, clotrimazole troches or nystatin pastilles are recommended because the therapeutic agent remains in the saliva longer
than with the liquid medication. For children old enough

to swallow, systemic fluconazole (100-mg tablets) in a 14day course may be prescribed when the infection has not
responded to topical antifungal agents.

ACUTE BACTERIAL INFECTIONS
The prevalence of acute bacterial infection in the oral cavity
is unknown. Acute streptococcal gingivitis is an example of
this type of infection. It is characterized by enlarged papilla,
gingival abscesses, and painful, erythematous gingiva that
bleed easily. Cultures show a predominance of hemolytic
streptococci. Acute infections of this type may be more common than was previously realized. The diagnosis is difficult
to make, however, without extensive laboratory tests. Broadspectrum antibiotics are recommended if the infection is
believed to be bacterial in origin. Improved oral hygiene is
important in treating the infection. As with any acute microbial oral infection, CH mouthrinses are also appropriate.

CHRONIC NONSPECIFIC GINGIVITIS
A type of gingivitis commonly seen during the preteenage
and teenage years is often referred to as chronic nonspecific
gingivitis. The chronic gingival inflammation may be localized to the anterior region, or it may be more generalized.
Although the condition is rarely painful, it may persist for
long periods without much improvement (Fig. 14-11).

Chapter 14

n

Gingivitis and Periodontal Disease

251

Figure 14-11 Chronic nonspecific gingivitis. The cause of

this type of gingivitis is complex, and it often persists for
prolonged periods without significant improvement.

Glauser and colleagues observed an unusual gingivitis
in Navajo Indians between 12 and 18 years of age, similar
to that seen in Figure 14-12, in which the fiery red gingival lesion was not accompanied by enlarged interdental
labial papillae or closely associated with local irritants.22
The gingivitis showed little improvement after a prophylactic treatment. The age of the patients involved and the
prevalence of the disease in girls suggested a hormonal
imbalance as a possible factor. Histologic examination
of tissue sections and the use of special stains ruled out
a bacterial infection. Inadequate oral hygiene, which allows for food impaction and the accumulation of materia
alba and bacterial plaque, is undoubtedly the major cause
of this chronic type of gingivitis.
The cause of chronic gingivitis is complex and is considered to be based on a multitude of local and systemic
factors. Because dietary inadequacies are often found in
the preteenage and teenage groups, the 7-day diet survey described in Chapter 8 is an important diagnostic
aid. Insufficient quantities of fruits and vegetables in the
diet, leading to a subclinical vitamin deficiency, may be
an important predisposing factor. An improved dietary
intake of vitamins and the use of multiple-vitamin supplements will improve the gingival condition in many
children.
Malocclusion, which prevents adequate function, and
crowded teeth, which make oral hygiene and plaque
removal more difficult, are also important predisposing
factors in gingivitis. Caries lesions, with irritating sharp
margins and faulty restorations with overhanging margins
(both of which cause food accumulation) also favor the
development of the chronic type of gingivitis. Therefore
the placement of dental restorations to restore adequate
function and contour of defective teeth after the reduction of acute symptoms is an equally important treatment
consideration.
A wide variety of local irritants can produce a hyperplastic type of gingivitis in children and young adults.
The irritation to the gingival tissue produced by mouth
breathing is often responsible for the development of the
chronic hyperplastic form of gingivitis, particularly in
the maxillary arch. All these factors should be considered
contributory to chronic nonspecific gingivitis and should
be corrected in the treatment of the condition. The

Figure 14-12 Fiery red gingival lesions essentially limited

to the anterior labial tissues. Only minimum local deposits
were evident. The gingivitis was classified as the chronic
nonspecific type.
importance of thorough daily oral hygiene must be
emphasized repeatedly to the patients.

CHLORHEXIDINE AS A THERAPEUTIC
PLAQUE CONTROL AGENT
CH is a cationic bisbiguanide with broad antimicrobial
activity that acts by rupturing cell membranes. It has
been used commonly as an antiseptic skin and wound
cleanser for presurgical preparation of the patient
and as a handwash and surgical scrub for health care
personnel. It has also been added as a preservative to
ophthalmic products and has been used internally in
very dilute concentrations in the peritoneal cavity and
urinary bladder. In addition to its broad antimicrobial
activity, CH exhibits a unique property known as substantivity, which allows the agent to bind to proteins in
human tissues. From there, the agent is slowly released,
thereby resulting in a prolonged antimicrobial activity
against gram-positive bacteria, gram-negative bacteria,
and fungi.
In dentistry, CH has been studied for control of
smooth surface caries, for use as a denture disinfectant,
and as a plaque control agent. Its use in controlling dental plaque accumulations has received the most attention
in dental research. Numerous studies have demonstrated
that CH reduces plaque by 50-55% and gingivitis by up
to 45%.23,24 Mouthrinses containing CH have been popular as therapeutic agents in several countries for some
time, and in 1986 CH was approved for use in the United
States. Two products under the trade names Peridex (Colgate-Palmolive Co.) and PerioGard (Zila Pharmaceuticals)
have received FDA approval as prescription agents. These
mouthrinses contain 0.12% CH gluconate as the active
ingredient. Outside of the United States, CH is offered as
a 0.2% solution. However, in a double-blinded, randomized, cross-over study comparing the two different concentrations’ antimicrobial effects and clinical efficacies in
reducing de novo plaque formation, Quirynen et al. did
not find any statistically significant differences between
the two.25

252

Chapter 14

n

Gingivitis and Periodontal Disease

The widespread use of CH mouthrinses over many
years, especially in Europe, has established an excellent safety record. Few adverse side-effects have been
reported with CH mouthrinses, but their use has been
linked to mouth dryness and burning sensations in
some persons due to the alcohol base. An alcohol-free
product is marketed under the trade name Gum® Paroex® (Sunstar Americas, Inc., Chicago, Illinois, United
States). Generalized staining over long-term use and taste
alterations have has been reported. Poorly defined desquamative lesions have been observed after the mouthrinse was used. Allergic reactions to CH are rare. If the
rinse is inadvertently swallowed, it has essentially little
systemic effect due to poor absorption in the gastrointestinal system.
Löoe and Schiöott reported highly significant inhibition of plaque formation and the prevention of gingivitis
with the use of an aqueous solution of 0.2% CH digluconate as a mouthrinse twice daily with swishing for
1 minute.26 Yankell and associates have shown that
dental stain from CH mouthrinse can be significantly
reduced with regular use of a tartar-control dentifrice.27
It is important to recognize that the beneficial use of
CH as a therapeutic mouthrinse should be considered
adjunctive to the practice of sound conventional plaque
control measures as presented in Chapter 7 and elsewhere
in this text. A study by Brecx and colleagues regarding the
efficacy of Listerine, Meridol, and CH mouthrinses found
CH to be the most effective to supplement habitual mechanical oral hygiene.28 They also found that a combination of habitual self-performed and nonsupervised oral
hygiene with Listerine or Meridol is more beneficial for
plaque control than the use of mechanical oral hygiene
alone. Its adjunctive use would also seem most appropriate for therapy in cases in which attaining adequate
plaque control is more difficult, such as during illness or
convalescence after serious injuries.
The rationale to include the use of a daily antimicrobial mouthrinse to the child’s and adolescent’s oral hygiene regimens when inadequate plaque control exists
to control and prevent periodontal disease and deliver
antimicrobial agents to mucosal sites harboring bacteria
throughout the mouth, thereby complementing plaque
control, is widely accepted.29

GINGIVAL DISEASES MODIFIED
BY SYSTEMIC FACTORS
GINGIVAL DISEASES ASSOCIATED WITH
THE ENDOCRINE SYSTEM
Puberty gingivitis is a distinctive type of gingivitis that
occasionally develops in children in the prepubertal and
pubertal period. Cohen, in a study of 270 boys and girls
in the 11- to 14-year age group, observed that gingival enlargement in the anterior segment occurred with regularity in the prepubertal and premenarcheal period, as well as
in pubescence.30 The gingival enlargement was marginal
in distribution and, in the presence of local irritants, was
characterized by prominent bulbous interproximal papillae far greater than gingival enlargements associated with

A

B
Figure 14-13 A, Puberty gingivitis. The enlargement of
the gingival tissues was limited to the mandibular anterior
region. B, Local treatment resulted in only a slight improvement of the condition. A persistence of the hyperplastic
enlargement would indicate the need for gingivoplasty.

local factors. Nakagawa and colleagues found a statistically significant increase in gingival inflammation, sex
hormones, and the occurrence of Prevotella intermedia in
adolescents during puberty.31
Sutcliffe’s survey of a group of children between 11 and
17 years of age revealed an initially high prevalence of
gingivitis that tended to decline with age.32 In both genders, the prevalence of gingivitis tended to decrease with
age. Initially, 89% of 11-year-olds and 92% of 12-yearolds were affected.
The enlargement of the gingival tissues in puberty gingivitis is confined to the anterior segment and may be
present in only one arch. The lingual gingival tissue generally remains unaffected (Fig. 14-13, A and B). Treatment
of puberty gingivitis should be directed toward improved
oral hygiene, removal of all local irritants, restoration of
carious teeth, and dietary changes necessary to ensure
an adequate nutritional status. Cohen observed a sharp
improvement in gingival inflammation and enlargement
after the oral administration of 500 mg of ascorbic acid.30
However, the improvement did not occur until the vitamin had been taken for approximately 4 weeks.
Diabetes is another endocrine disorder that can adversely affect gingival health. Studies have demonstrated

Chapter 14

that patients with diabetes tend to develop a more pronounced plaque-induced gingival inflammation than do
those without diabetes. In a cross-sectional investigation
comparing the gingival health of 85 adolescents with
insulin-dependent diabetes (IDDM) and 38 healthy controls, De Pommereau and colleagues found that IDDM
adolescents suffered significantly more gingival inflammation than did healthy controls, despite having similar
plaque scores. A definitive reason for this finding could
not be reached; however, the investigators recommended
close periodontal monitoring of IDDM children and adolescents.33
Severe cases of hyperplastic gingivitis that do not respond to local or systemic therapy should be treated by
gingivoplasty. Surgical removal of the thickened fibrotic
marginal and interproximal tissue has been found effective. Recurrence of any hyperplastic tissue will be minimal if adequate oral hygiene is maintained.

n

Gingivitis and Periodontal Disease

253

A

GINGIVAL LESIONS OF GENETIC ORIGIN
Hereditary gingival fibromatosis (HGF) is characterized
by a slow, progressive, benign enlargement of the gingiva. Clinically, the HGF-gingival enlargement is characterized as being of normal color, firm consistency,
non-hemorrhagic, and asymptomatic with an equal
gender predilection. HGF, which is the most common
genetic form of gingival enlargement, usually has an
autosomal-dominant mode of inheritance. This rare
type of gingivitis has been referred to as elephantiasis gingivae or hereditary hyperplasia of the gums. The gingival
tissues appear normal at birth but begin to enlarge with
the eruption of the primary teeth. Although mild cases
are observed, the gingival tissues usually continue to
enlarge with eruption of the permanent teeth until the
tissues essentially cover the clinical crowns of the teeth
(Figs. 14-14, A and B). The dense fibrous tissue often
causes displacement of the teeth and malocclusion. The
condition is not painful until the tissue enlarges to the
extent that it partially covers the occlusal surfaces of the
molars and becomes traumatized during mastication.
Zackin and Weisberger described fibromatosis histologically as a moderate hyperplasia of the epithelium,
with hyperkeratosis and elongation of the rete pegs.34
The increase in tissue mass is primarily the result of an
increase and thickening of the collagenous bundles in the
connective tissue stroma. The tissue shows a high degree
of differentiation, and a few young fibroblasts are present
(Fig. 14-14, C).
Surgical removal of the hyperplastic tissue achieves a
more favorable oral and facial appearance. However, hyperplasia can recur within a few months and can return
to the original condition within a few years. Although
the tissue usually appears pale and firm, the surgical procedure is accompanied by excessive hemorrhage. Therefore quadrant surgery is usually recommended. Brown
and colleagues have reported a case in which apically
positioned flap surgery and CO2 laser evaporation were
used to reduce the gingival tissue.35 The importance of
excellent plaque control should be stressed to the patient
because this delays the recurrence of the gingival overgrowth.

B

C
Figure 14-14 A, Hereditary gingival fibromatosis in an
11-year-old female. The maxillary anterior gingival tissues
completely covered the crowns of teeth #6, 7, 8, 9, 10, and
11. B, Clinical presentation approximately 6 weeks after the
maxillary teeth were surgically exposed by removal of excessive tissue. Although oral hygiene still needs to improve,
the results of the surgical procedure were dramatic. C,
Histologic specimen of HGF. Note the moderate hyperplasia
of the epithelium with elongated rete pegs. The underlying
connective tissue is composed of thick, irregularly arranged
collagen fibers. (C, From Coletta RD, Graner E: Hereditary
gingival fibromatosis: a systematic review, J Periodontol
77:753-764, 2006.)

254

Chapter 14

n

Gingivitis and Periodontal Disease

PHENYTOIN-INDUCED GINGIVAL OVERGROWTH
Phenytoin (Dilantin, or diphenylhydantoin), a major anticonvulsant agent used in the treatment of epilepsy, was
first introduced in the late 1930s, with common side effects
of various degrees of gingival hyperplasia first described by
Kimball in 1939.36 He reported that 57% of 119 patients
taking phenytoin for the control of seizure activity experienced some degree of gingival overgrowth.
Today an estimated two million people use this medication because of its comparative safety and broad therapeutic
range. The incidence of phenytoin-induced gingival overgrowth (PIGO) in patients undergoing long-term phenytoin
therapy has been reported as ranging between 0% and 95%,
with numerous investigators reporting figures at the 40% to
50% level.37
Early research showed an increase in the number of
fibroblasts in patients receiving Dilantin; thus the condition was termed Dilantin hyperplasia. Now the term
phenytoin-induced gingival overgrowth is preferred because
Hassell and colleagues found true hyperplasia not to exist.38 Neither was there excessive collagen accumulation
per unit of tissue nor did the fibroblasts appear abnormal
in number or size.
The influence of serum and salivary levels of phenytoin on the development of PIGO has also been investigated. Some authors report a positive relationship
between the level of phenytoin in serum and saliva and
the severity of PIGO in some cases.39,40,41 Other investigators have reported that no such correlation exists.42,43
It is generally agreed that a relationship exists between
dosage and PIGO when the level of phenytoin per unit
body weight or actual serum level is considered. Sasaki
and Maita reported a significant correlation between the
degree of gingival overgrowth and a high level of basic
fibroblast growth factor in serum.44 No such correlations
were observed for patient age, daily or total phenytoin
dose, duration of therapy, or serum phenytoin level.
Most investigators agree on the existence of a close relationship between oral hygiene and PIGO. PIGO can be
decreased or prevented by scrupulous oral hygiene and
dental prophylaxis. The relationship between plaque, local
irritants, and PIGO is also supported by the observation
that patients without teeth almost never develop PIGO.
PIGO, when it does develop, begins to appear as early
as 2 to 3 weeks after the initiation of phenytoin therapy
and peaks at 18 to 24 months. The initial clinical appearance is painless enlargement of the interproximal gingiva.
The buccal and anterior segments are more often affected
than the lingual and posterior segments (Figs. 14-15 and
14-16, A). The affected areas are isolated at first but can
become more generalized later. Unless secondary infection or inflammation is present, the gingiva appears pink
and firm and does not bleed easily when probed. As the
interdental lobulations grow, clefting becomes apparent
at the midline of the tooth. With time, the lobulations
coalesce at the midline, forming pseudopockets and covering more of the crown of the tooth. The epithelial attachment level usually remains constant. In some cases
the entire occlusal surface of the tooth becomes covered.
These lesions may remain purely fibrotic or may be combined with a noticeable inflammatory component.

Figure 14-15 Phenytoin gingivitis of the severe generalized

type in an 11-year-old child. The enlarged gingival tissue
covers a significant portion of the clinical crowns of the
maxillary and mandibular surfaces of the anterior dentition.

A

B
Figure 14-16 A, Phenytoin gingivitis of the severe generalized type. B, Surgical removal of the overgrowth of hyperplastic gingival tissue results in temporary improvement of
the condition. Excellent oral hygiene is essential in controlling the gingival enlargement.

PIGO may impose problems of aesthetics, difficulty in
mastication, speech impairment, delayed tooth eruption,
tissue trauma, and secondary inflammation leading to
periodontal disease.45 No cure exists, and treatment is often symptomatic. Antihistamines, topical corticosteroids,

Chapter 14

ascorbic acid (vitamin C) supplements, topical antibiotics, and alkaline mouthwashes are considered to be ineffective.
Steinberg and Steinberg describe the recommended
dental treatment based on clinical oral signs and symptoms.46 Patients with mild PIGO (i.e., less than one third of
the clinical crown is covered) require daily meticulous oral
hygiene and more frequent dental care. For patients with
moderate PIGO (i.e., one to two thirds of the clinical crown
is covered), meticulous oral home care and the judicious
use of an irrigating device may be needed. Use of an antiplaque mouthrinse (0.12% chlorhexidine gluconate) in the
device further helps control bacterial growth. Initially, a series of four consecutive weekly office visits for prophylaxis
and topical stannous fluoride application is recommended.
The fifth week is used to evaluate the gingivae and note
any change in size. Phenytoin levels should be checked
(normal therapeutic range is 10 to 15 mg/mL). If there has
been no change, consultation with the patient’s physician
concerning the possibility of using a different anticonvulsant drug may be helpful. If no improvement occurs,
surgical removal of the overgrowth may be recommended.
For patients with severe PIGO (i.e., more than two thirds
of the tooth is covered) who do not respond to the previously mentioned therapeutic regimens, surgical removal is
necessary. As in any periodontal surgery, scaling and root
planing before surgery and meticulous oral hygiene after
surgery are essential to minimize the overgrowth, which
can occur as early as 3 to 4 weeks after surgery (Fig 14-16,
B). Donnenfeld and colleagues found no PIGO recurrence
for as long as 9 months postoperatively.47 If surgery is required a second time and the patient has a history of rapid
recurrence, a pressure appliance should be considered as
an adjunct to home oral care. If the patient has multiple
gingivectomies, clinical management becomes one of postponing repeat surgery for as long as possible.
Specific surgical approaches for PIGO include gingivectomy with periodontal knives, laser, or electrosurgery, and
internal bevel flap surgery. The use of periodontal knives
allows the tissue to heal more quickly, but more operative
and postoperative bleeding occurs, and the procedure requires more time and patient cooperation. Electrosurgery
is less time-consuming, decreases blood loss, improves visibility, allows for superior control in areas of limited access, is self-sterilizing, and does not always require the use
of periodontal packs. Disadvantages include its contraindication in patients with cardiac pacemakers, unpleasant
odor, delayed healing, and the potential for error in application that results in undesired bone or tissue loss. Advantages of the surgical laser include the following: lack
of hemorrhage, which yields a dry field; noncontact during surgery; sterilization of the surgical area; prompt healing; minimal postoperative discomfort; and minimal time
spent in performance of the procedures. Disadvantages include cost and size of equipment, necessity for hospitalization, potential for delayed healing of some tissues, greater
degree of expertise required, loss of tactile feedback, requirement for eye protection, ability of the laser to ignite
a plastic or rubber endotracheal tube, and a need to cover
the nonsurgical field with moist sponge shields to prevent
penetration of the laser beam. Internal bevel flap surgery

n

Gingivitis and Periodontal Disease

255

has some advantages over the previously mentioned treatment modalities. The internal bevel flap promotes faster
healing (stimulates primary healing), controls postoperative bleeding, minimizes postoperative pain, and allows
for the optional use of a periodontal pack. The choice of
surgical approach must be left to the operator and is based
on patient cooperation and compliance, the degree of gingival overgrowth, and operator expertise. Healing is usually rapid with all these modalities.
The surgical removal of severely overgrown tissue in
PIGO and good oral hygiene after surgery are generally
considered to be the most effective treatment. However,
even these procedures have often been followed by a
gradual recurrence of the fibrous tissue.
A preliminary study of the use of a pressure appliance for PIGO hyperplasia has been reported by Davis
and colleagues.48 Immediately after the surgical removal
of hyperplastic tissue, an impression was taken and a
positive-pressure splint was constructed. Periodontal
dressings were removed at the end of 1 week, and the
positive-pressure appliance was inserted. Seven of the
nine members of the experimental group had no recurrence of gingival hyperplasia, one had a slight recurrence, and one had a moderate recurrence. The natural
rubber, mouth-protector type of appliance and the type
with a cast chromium-cobalt framework lined with soft
plastic were equally effective. The appliance is generally
used only at night but may be worn night and day if
such a schedule is required. Sheridan and Reeve also reported success in controlling gingival overgrowth with
positive-pressure appliances.49
Steinberg suggested that use of a series of pressure appliances may help reduce the size of the gingival overgrowth without surgery.50 He reported one case in which
existing systemic conditions contraindicated surgical removal of the gingival tissue. After oral hygiene was improved, pressure appliances were made on stone casts
of the patient’s maxillary and mandibular arches after
2 mm of the stone were trimmed away in the gingival
overgrowth areas. The patient wore the appliance about
12 hours each day for 4 weeks, after which a new pressure device was made. Steinberg observed a pronounced
decrease in the sizes of the gingival lesions after 8 weeks
of therapy. He suggested that a series of such appliances
could succeed in gradually reducing gingival overgrowth
to clinically tolerable limits. He also pointed out that this
therapeutic approach is not practical for the average patient but that it may prove valuable for patients for whom
oral surgery is contraindicated.
Drew and colleagues51 and Bäckman and associates52
have reported that patients with PIGO or patients at risk
for developing it may benefit from receiving folate therapy. Their work demonstrated a reduction in the severity
of PIGO in patients who received systemic folic acid supplementation. The work of Drew and colleagues further
demonstrated that twice-daily oral rinsing with a topical folic acid solution resulted in tissue responses significantly better than those achieved with systemic folic acid
therapy.51 Their studies suggest that folic acid therapy
may inhibit PIGO and that additional related studies are
indicated.

256

Chapter 14

n

Gingivitis and Periodontal Disease

A

A

B
Figure 14-17 A, Severe scorbutic gingivitis in a 16-monthold child. Large hematomas were evident in the maxillary
arch. The condition was initially incorrectly diagnosed as
Vincent infection. B, Daily administration of 400 mg of
ascorbic acid resulted in a dramatic recovery.

Other drugs that have been reported to induce gingival overgrowth in some patients include cyclosporin,
calcium channel blockers, valproic acid, and phenobarbital. As with all disorders affecting periodontal tissues, the
maintenance of excellent oral hygiene is the primary key
to successful therapy.

ASCORBIC ACID DEFICIENCY GINGIVITIS
(SCORBUTIC GINGIVITIS)
Scorbutic gingivitis is associated with vitamin C deficiency
and differs from the type of gingivitis related to poor oral
hygiene. The involvement is usually limited to marginal
tissues and papillae. The child with scorbutic gingivitis
may complain of severe pain. Spontaneous hemorrhage
may be evident. Aside from dietary deficiencies, ascorbic
acid deficiency gingivitis can be seen in both pediatric
and adult cancer patients undergoing radiotherapy and/
or chemotherapy where the mucosal linings of the intestinal walls are affected and the absorption of nutrients is
impaired.
Severe clinical scorbutic gingivitis is rare in children.
However, it may occur in children allergic to fruit juices
when provision of an adequate dietary supplement of vitamin C is neglected (Fig. 14-17, A). When blood studies
indicate a vitamin C deficiency and exclude other possible
systemic conditions, the gingivitis responds dramatically
to the daily administration of 250 to 500 mg of ascorbic
acid (Fig. 14-17, B). Older children and adults may require
1 g of vitamin C for 2 weeks to speed recovery.

B
Figure 14-18 A, Scorbutic gingivitis in a 13-year-old girl.
The diet was almost entirely lacking in foods containing
vitamin C. B, An improved diet, supplemental amounts of
fresh fruit juices, and toothbrushing instruction resulted in
an improved gingival condition in 2 weeks.

A less severe type of gingivitis resulting from vitamin
C deficiency is probably much more common than most
dentists realize. Inflammation and enlargement of the
marginal gingival tissue and papillae in the absence of local predisposing factors are possible evidence of scorbutic
gingivitis (Fig 14-18, A and B). Questioning the child and
parents regarding eating habits and using the 7-day diet
survey frequently reveal that the child is receiving inadequate amounts of foods containing vitamin C. Complete
dental care, improved oral hygiene, and supplementation
with vitamin C and other water-soluble vitamins will
greatly improve the gingival condition.

PERIODONTAL DISEASES IN CHILDREN
Periodontitis, an inflammatory disease of the gingiva
and deeper tissues of the periodontium, is characterized
by pocket formation and destruction of the supporting
alveolar bone. Bone loss in children can be detected in
bitewing radiographs by comparison of the height of the
alveolar bone with that of the cemento-enamel junction.
Distances between 2 and 3 mm indicate questionable

Chapter 14

n

Gingivitis and Periodontal Disease

257

bone loss, and distances greater than 3 mm indicate definite bone loss.
Periodontal probing for attachment loss and bitewing
radiography are often used for the clinical confirmation
of the diagnosis. Bone loss is usually between the primary
first and second molars.
In its classification of periodontitis, the American
Academy of Periodontology categorized the early-onset
form under Aggressive Periodontitis.53

AGGRESSIVE PERIODONTITIS (EARLY-ONSET
PERIODONTITIS)
Aggressive periodontitis is used as a generic term to describe
a heterogeneous group of periodontal diseases occurring
in younger individuals who may or may not be otherwise
healthy. Aggressive periodontitis can be viewed as two
categories of periodontitis that may have overlapping
etiologies and clinical presentations: (1) a localized form
(localized aggressive periodontitis [LAP]) and (2) a generalized form (generalized aggressive periodontitis [GAP]).
Albandar and colleagues, using data from a 1986-1987
survey, estimated the prevalence of aggressive periodontitis in adolescent schoolchildren in the United States to
be 10% in African Americans, 5% in Hispanics, and 1.3%
in whites.54
Löe and Brown have reported observations from a periodontal assessment of 1107 adolescents aged from 14 to
17 years.55 Approximately 0.53% were estimated to have
LAP, 0.13% to have GAP, and 1.61% to have incidental
loss of attachment. Boys were more likely to have GAP
than were girls (ratio, 4.3:1).
Aggressive periodontitis of the primary dentition can
occur in a localized form but is usually seen in the generalized form. LAP is localized attachment loss and alveolar
bone loss only in the primary dentition in an otherwise
healthy child. The exact time of onset is unknown, but it
appears to arise around or before 4 years of age, when the
bone loss is usually seen on radiographs around the primary
molars and/or incisors. Abnormal probing depths with minor gingival inflammation, rapid bone loss, and minimal
to various amounts of plaque have been demonstrated at
the affected sites of the child’s dentition. Abnormalities in
host defenses (e.g., leukocyte chemotaxis), extensive proximal caries facilitating plaque retention and bone loss, and
a family history of periodontitis have been associated with
LAP in children.56 As the disease progresses, the child’s periodontium shows signs of gingival inflammation, with gingival clefts and localized ulceration of the gingival margin.

GENERALIZED AGGRESSIVE PERIODONTITIS
The onset of GAP is during or soon after the eruption of
the primary teeth. It results in severe gingival inflammation and generalized attachment loss, tooth mobility, and
rapid alveolar bone loss with premature exfoliation of the
teeth (Fig. 14-19). The gingival tissue may initially demonstrate only minor inflammation with plaque accumulation at a minimum. It often affects the entire dentition.
Alveolar bone destruction proceeds rapidly, and the primary teeth may be lost by 3 years of age. Because of its
wide distribution and rapid rate of alveolar bone destruction, the GAP was previously known as generalized juvenile

Figure 14-19 Radiographs of prepubertal periodontitis in a

4 1/2-year-old girl. A generalized loss of alveolar bone can
be seen in the radiographs.

periodontitis, severe periodontitis, and rapidly progressive periodontitis. Chronic cases display the presence of clefting and
pronounced recession with associated acute inflammation.
Affected teeth harbor more nonmotile, facultative,
anaerobic, gram-negative rods (especially Porphyromonas
gingivalis) in GAP than in LAP. Microorganisms predominating in the gingival pockets include Aggregatibacter
actinomycetemcomitans (Aa), Porphyromonas (Bacteroides)
gingivalis (Pg), Bacteroides melaninogenicus, Prevotella intermedia, Capnocytophaga sputigena, and Fusobacterium
nucleatum. Findings of Asikainen and associates suggest
that the major periodontal pathogens are transmitted
among family members.57 The past medical history of
the child often reveals a history of recurrent infections
(e.g., otitis media, skin infections, upper respiratory
tract infections).
LAP and GAP are distinctly different radiographically
and clinically. Neutrophils in GAP patients have suppressed chemotaxis. Individuals with GAP exhibit marked
periodontal inflammation and have heavy accumulations
of plaque and calculus. Testing may reveal a high prevalence of leukocyte adherence abnormalities and an impaired host response to bacterial infections.
[See the later section on Premature Bone Loss in the
Primary Dentition.]

LOCALIZED AGGRESSIVE PERIODONTITIS
(LOCALIZED JUVENILE PERIODONTITIS)
The term for the previously described condition of localized juvenile periodontitis has also been replaced
by the term localized aggressive periodontitis. This condition presents a classic pattern and occurs in otherwise
healthy children and adolescents without clinical evidence of systemic disease. It is characterized by the rapid
and severe loss of alveolar bone around more than one
permanent tooth, usually the first molars and incisors

258

Chapter 14

n

Gingivitis and Periodontal Disease

(Fig. 14-20, Fig 14-21, A and B). It appears self-limiting,
and analysis of retrospective data obtained from LAP
patients suggests that bone loss around the primary teeth
can be an early finding in this disease. Reported estimates of the prevalence of LAP range from 0.1% to 1.5%,
with a bilaterally symmetric pattern of bone loss in a

geographically diverse adolescent population. The
prevalence in the African-American population is greater—2.5%. Clinically, LAP patients have less tissue inflammation and very little supragingival dental plaque or
calculus. However, they do present with evidence of subgingival plaque accumulation, both tissue-associated and
tooth-associated. Progression of bone loss is three to four
times faster than in chronic periodontitis.
LAP is not thought to be a single disease entity. The
probable causative microbial species are Aa or Aa in
combination with Porphyromonas-like species. A variety
of neutrophil defects has been reported in patients with
LAP. According to Page and colleagues, most patients
with LAP manifest abnormalities in peripheral blood neutrophil (polymorphonuclear leukocyte) chemotaxis and,
in some cases, in monocyte chemotaxis.58 Also, anomalies of phagocytosis, bacterial activity, leukotriene B4 generation, and other defects have been reported. Page and
colleagues suspect a hereditary basis for LAP; some believe
that the mode of transmission is autosomal recessive, but
others have provided evidence that the pattern is typical
of an X-linked–dominant mode.

TREATMENT OF AGGRESSIVE PERIODONTITIS
Figure 14-20 Radiographs of a 12-year-old boy with the lo-

calized form of early-onset periodontitis. The films revealed
loss of support in the incisor and first permanent molar
areas. The maxillary central incisors, mandibular incisors,
and first permanent molars were removed. Partial dentures
were constructed.

Successful treatment of aggressive periodontitis depends
on early diagnosis, the use of antibiotics against the infecting microorganisms, and the provision of an infectionfree environment for healing. Treatment of aggressive
periodontitis, both LAP and GAP, includes oral hygiene

A

B

C

D

Figure 14-21 A, Localized aggressive periodontitis. B, Radiographic evidence of vertical bone loss on the mesial surfaces of
tooth #14 and especially tooth #19. C, Clinical evidence of the vertical bone loss of tooth #19. D, Guided Tissue Regeneration
as a treatment option using a bone allograph and a membrane.

Chapter 14

instructions, consultation with the patient’s physician if
necessary, and mechanical removal of supragingival and
subgingival microbial agents via nonsurgical and/or surgical treatment modalities with adjunctive antimicrobial
therapy (Fig. 14-21, C and D). Adjunctive antimicrobial
therapy should be used to aid in the elimination of any
Aa organisms that have penetrated the microscopic ulcerations of the crevicular epithelium. A combination regimen of amoxicillin and metronidazole over 1 to 2 weeks
has been found to eliminate Aa and suppress Pg significantly. On the other hand, the use of tetracyclines to
treat aggressive periodontitis in the pediatric population
should be avoided because this could cause discoloration
of teeth. Likewise, tetracyclines should not be prescribed
to pregnant mothers because these antibiotics are classified as FDA Pregnancy Category D agents. In a study of
deep periodontal lesions, Christersson and colleagues
demonstrated that scaling and root planing alone were
ineffective for the elimination of Aa.59
Microdentex manufactures the DMDx (Microdentex,
Fort Myers, Florida, United States) test, a DNA test kit for
periodontal pathogens. The test aids in establishing the
risk of aggressive periodontitis and confirms whether the
child has responded favorably to the use of adjunctive antibiotics. Retesting in 4 to 6 weeks after the completion
of antibiotic therapy determines the patient’s response
to the treatment. The test involves collection of a plaque
specimen by the insertion of a paper point provided in
the kit into a periodontal pocket for 10 seconds. The paper point is placed in a test vial and returned for microbial
testing. Although the Pedo Probe test provides a detailed
analysis only for Aa, the laboratory will also perform a
more detailed microbial analysis.
Treatment of GAP is often less predictable. Alternative antibiotics directed at the specific pathogenic flora
may be required when there is no response to traditional
therapies. The multidisciplinary approach combines clinical laboratory evaluation with conventional periodontal
therapeutic methods for the diagnosis and treatment of
severe GAP cases.

n

Gingivitis and Periodontal Disease

259

8.	Infantile genetic agranulocytosis
9.	Cohen syndrome
10.	Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (types IV and VIII)
11.	Hypophosphatasia
  12.	Other
C. Not otherwise specified (NOS)

PREMATURE BONE LOSS IN THE PRIMARY
DENTITION
Advanced alveolar bone loss associated with systemic
disease occurs in children and adolescents, as well as in
adults. In the primary dentition, this is rare. Although
most premature tooth loss from non-systemic disease
results from trauma or caries, the cause of advanced alveolar bone loss is often not readily apparent. Local factors (periodontitis, trauma, and infection secondary to
caries) account for the majority of cases of premature
bone loss. Goepferd reports that bony destruction in
the primary dentition in the absence of local factors is
highly suggestive of systemic disease.60 Many possibilities exist, including hypophosphatasia, Papillon-Lefèvre
syndrome, histiocytosis X, agranulocytosis, leukocyte
adherence deficiency, neutropenias, leukemias, diabetes
mellitus, scleroderma, fibrous dysplasia, acrodynia, Down
syndrome, and Chédiak-Higashi syndrome. The defect
in immune and neutrophil cell function associated with
these diseases is thought to increase patient susceptibility
to periodontitis causing alveolar bone loss and to other
infections.

PAPILLON-LEFÈVRE SYNDROME
Coccia and colleagues observed Papillon-Lefèvre syndrome (precocious periodontosis) in a 2 1/2-year-old
child.61 The syndrome is rare, and the cause unknown.
However, in the families of affected children (1 to 4 per
1,000,000) in which a familial predisposition to the disorder is noted, an autosomal-recessive mode of inheritance has been identified.62 There is no racial or gender
predominance.

PERIODONTITIS AS A MANIFESTATION
OF SYSTEMIC DISEASE
In 1999 the American Academy of Periodontology introduced a new classification, classifying periodontitis as a
manifestation of systemic disease as a separate category.
Several of these conditions are identified in the pediatric
population:
A. Associated with hematological disorders
  
1.	Acquired neutropenia
2.	Leukemias
  3.	Other
B. Associated with genetic disorders
  
1.	Familial and cyclic neutropenia
2.	Down syndrome
3.	Leukocyte adhesion deficiency syndromes
4.	Papillon-Lefèvre syndrome
5.	Chédiak-Higashi syndrome
6.	Histiocytosis syndromes
7.	Glycogen storage disease

Figure 14-22 Intraoral condition of a 2½-year-old child with

Papillon-Lefèvre syndrome. Inflammatory gingival engorgement and accumulated accretions were present, especially
in the mandibular incisor area.

260

Chapter 14

n

Gingivitis and Periodontal Disease

Figure 14-23 Hyperkeratosis of the plantar surfaces of the

feet (arrows).

The observations made in the young child (Fig. 14-22)
are typical of those reported by Gorlin and associates.63
The primary teeth erupted at the normal time. However,
as early as 2 years of age, the child rubbed the gingival
tissues and acted as if they were painful. There was a
tendency toward gingival bleeding when the teeth were
brushed. Hyperkeratosis of the palms and soles was present
(Fig. 14-23); the first evidence was erythema and scaliness noted initially at 8 months of age. Delaney noted
that hyperkeratotic lesions of the elbows and knees may
be observed.1 Repeated laboratory tests, including complete blood count, urinalysis, and micro serum calcium
and phosphorus determinations, yielded essentially normal
results.
At 2½ years of age, all the primary teeth showed looseness, and full-mouth radiographs revealed severe horizontal bone resorption (Fig. 14-24). Because of gingival
inflammation, patient discomfort, and the presence of
infected periodontal pockets, all the primary teeth were
removed by 3 years of age. Histologic sections of the teeth
displayed a premature resorption pattern with essentially
normal pulp tissue. Cementum was apparently normal
and covered the root structure. An accumulation of adherent basophilic plaque, made up of a mass of filamentous
microorganisms, was noted on almost the entire length
of the root surface. Periodontal pathogens (Aggregatibacter
actinomycetemcomitans, Fusobacterium nucleatum, Capnocytophaga species, and Eikenella corrodens) have been isolated
in the dental plaque of patients with Papillon-Lefèvre
syndrome, according to Tinanoff and colleagues.64
Complete dentures were constructed 3 months after the
removal of the primary teeth. The child tolerated the dentures well, both functionally and psychologically (Fig. 1425, A and B). The first permanent molars and mandibular
central incisors erupted at the expected time, and the denture base was adjusted to allow for the emergence of the
teeth. Although previous reports have indicated that the
permanent dentition will also be affected, the child whose
history is reported here has been followed into young
adulthood, and the dentition, including the supporting

tissues, appears normal (Fig. 14-26). In addition, the patient
has successfully undergone orthodontic treatment.
Reports of the effectiveness of tetracycline therapy as
an adjunct to meticulous subgingival debridement in the
management of periodontal disease prompted McDonald
to reinvestigate the history in the reported case of PapillonLefèvre syndrome. The father, a physician, reported that
tetracyclines were given to the child repeatedly for ear
infections between 3 and 6 years of age. This regimen
may have been responsible for eliminating pathogens
and preventing the destructive process from being carried
into the permanent dentition. However, attempts at conventional therapy have been unsuccessful in preventing
tooth loss. Delaney reports that periodontal treatment for
these young children includes identification of specific
pathogens, specific antibiotic therapy against these organisms, and full-mouth extractions early enough to provide
an edentulous period before permanent tooth eruption.3

GINGIVAL RECESSION
Gingival recession is often observed in children. Several
factors predispose patients to gingival recession. These
factors include the presence of a narrow band of attached or keratinized gingiva, alveolar bony dehiscence,
toothbrush trauma, tooth prominence, impinging frenum attachment, soft tissue impingement by opposing
occlusion, orthodontic tooth movement, use of impression techniques including subgingival tissue retraction,
oral habits, periodontitis, pseudorecession (extrusion of
teeth), and intraoral piercings, such as tongue piercings.
Recession is dealt with conservatively by elimination of
the etiology if possible, while excellent oral hygiene is
maintained in the affected areas. If the recession of the
affected area remains unchanged (nonprogressive) or improves, continued periodic monitoring is recommended.
If the recession has progressed after a 4- to 8-week period
of observation, other periodontal procedures may be required based on the identified predisposing factor.

SELF-MUTILATION
Although there has been infrequent reference to selfmutilation in the dental literature, occasionally children
purposely traumatize their oral structures. Plesset reported observing a 9-year-old girl of apparently normal intelligence who worked her maxillary primary canine and
mandibular permanent incisors loose from their supporting tissues and removed them.65 In another case Leksell
and Edvardson reported on a 4-year-old female child who
presented to her pediatric dentist for self-luxation of teeth
caused by oral motor tics. Further investigation revealed
that the patient’s oral self-injurious behavior was associated with a previously undiagnosed Tourette syndrome.66
Self-mutilation probably occurs more frequently than
is realized because relatively few children will admit to the
act unless they are observed practicing it. Therefore the
self-inflicted lesions may be incorrectly diagnosed. Dentists should be aware of the possibility of this condition
and should approach the problem in the same manner as
they do thumb sucking. An attempt should be made to
determine the cause. If it is found to be the result of local
dental factors, it can be corrected. However, in the majority

Chapter 14

n

Gingivitis and Periodontal Disease

261

Figure 14-24 Full-mouth and bitewing radiographs of a 2½-year-old child with Papillon-Lefèvre syndrome. Severe horizontal

bone resorption is readily detected in all four quadrants. The incisor areas display extreme alveolar bone loss to the extent that
only the apical third of the root remains supported. All primary teeth were extracted by 3 years of age, and dentures were
constructed.
of children an emotional problem is involved, and the
family must be directed to competent counseling services.
Children as young as 4 years of age have been observed
who have traumatized the free and attached gingival tissues with a fingernail, occasionally to the extent that the
supporting alveolar bone has been destroyed. In a case
report, Krejci reported on an 8-year-old African-American
male who presented with gingival swelling along the facial marginal gingiva of the maxillary right central incisor. Investigation revealed that the patient had a positive

history of fingernail chewing and a habit of sliding the
cleaved fingernails underneath the gingival margins of
his maxillary central incisors. As a result, surgical intervention and counseling were recommended (Fig. 14-27,
A-E).67 A 14-year-old girl produced unilateral stripping of
the buccal tissue in the maxillary canine area (Fig. 14-28,
A and B) with her fingernail. The condition can be successfully treated surgically once the habit is stopped.
Traumatic gingival recession in infants resulting from
a dummy (pacifier) sucking habit has been observed by

262

Chapter 14

n

Gingivitis and Periodontal Disease

A

B

Figure 14-25 A, Three-year-old child with complete dentures. B, Constructed complete dentures, which were later modified

to allow for eruption of the mandibular incisors and the first permanent molars.

A

Figure 14-26 A, Anterior intraoral view.
B, Panorex of the patient noted in Figures
14-24 and 14-25 at 15 years of age. The
survey revealed normal alveolar bone. Some
apical root resorption related to orthodontic
treatment can be seen in the mandibular
incisors.

B

Chapter 14

n

Gingivitis and Periodontal Disease

263

A
A

B
B
Figure 14-28 A, Stripping of the free and attached tissue
from the buccal side of a cuspid and exposure of the root
surface secondary to constant scraping with a fingernail.
B, After a surgical procedure and the cessation of scraping,
adequate healing had occurred.

C
Figure 14-27 A, An 8-year-old African American with
gingival swelling along the maxillary right central incisor.
B, Surgical intervention reveals fragments of embedded
fingernail in the gingiva. C, Fingernail remnants removed
during surgical procedure.

Stewart and Kernohan.68 In the unconventional sucking
habit, a segment of the plastic shield is embraced by the
infant’s lower lip so that the inner surface of the shield
bears against the labial aspect of the incisors and the
gingival tissues. If the shield is held in this position, the
edge of the shield moves with an abrasive action during
sucking, leading to gingival injury, recession, and loss of
alveolar bone.
Self-mutilation by biting has been associated with severe emotional disturbances such as Lesch-Nyhan syndrome, congenital insensitivity to pain, and autism.
Friedlander and colleagues report autistic children with
facial bruising, abrasions, and intraoral traumatic ulcerations that are most often the result of self-injurious
behaviors rather than abuse by parents or caretakers.69
Management requires a choice between the initial use of
protective appliances vs. surgical procedures. Littlewood
and Mitchell report that mouthguards are helpful for

264

Chapter 14

n

Gingivitis and Periodontal Disease

children with congenital indifference to pain until they
are mature enough to appreciate and avoid self-mutilating
behaviors, a learning process normally acquired by painful
experiences.70 Cusumano and colleagues report that the
use of carbamazepine may be beneficial for children with
Lesch-Nyhan syndrome.71

ABNORMAL FRENUM ATTACHMENT
A frenum is a membranous fold that joins two parts and
restricts the individual movement of each. Henry and
colleagues describe a frenum as a mucous membrane
fold containing epithelium and connective tissue fibers
but no muscle.72 In contrast, Ross and colleagues histologically analyzed 40 frenal biopsy specimens and found
that 37.5% of the specimens contained skeletal or striated muscle.73 A normal frenum attaches apically to the
free gingival margin so as not to exert a pull on the zone
of the attached gingiva, usually terminating at the mucogingival junction. Although a wide variety of aberrant
positions occurs, commonly observed locations of frena
in the child are on the facial gingival surface of the anterior midline of the maxilla, on the facial and lingual
gingival surfaces of the anterior midline of the mandible,
and on the mandibular and maxillary premolar facial
area. Some frena have bifid and trifid attachments to the
alveolar process.
An abnormal or high frenum is present when there
is inadequate attached gingiva in the terminal insertion
area. A frenum attached too closely to the gingival margin
may interfere with proper toothbrush placement, may
cause opening of the gingival crevice during function, or
may interfere with speech. High frenum attachments may
also be associated with isolated gingival recessions and
diastemas, although a cause-and-effect relationship may
or may not exist.
An abnormally short lingual frenum and the inability to
extend the tongue constitute a congenital condition known
as ankyloglossia (tongue-tie).74 Normal function can occur
with this mild form, and the frenum may lengthen with
normal growth and maturation of the child.
A mandibular anterior frenum occasionally inserts
into the free or marginal gingival tissue and causes subsequent recession and pocket formation. The abnormal
frenum attachment is most often observed in the central incisor area (Fig. 14-29), although it may involve
the labial tissue in the canine areas. The abnormal attachment is frequently associated with a vestibular
trough that is more shallow than normal throughout
the anterior region.
Movements of the lip cause the abnormal frenum to
pull on the fibers inserting into the free marginal tissue.
Food accumulates, causing inflammation and eventually
the development of a pocket between the labial surface
of the tooth and the vestibular mucosa. Early treatment
of the abnormal frenum attachment is indicated to prevent continued stripping of the labial tissue, subsequent
loss of alveolar bone, and possible eventual loss of the
tooth. Although traumatic occlusion and poor oral hygiene are occasionally associated with the gingival stripping condition, the abnormal frenum attachment is
more often the offender.

Figure 14-29 Abnormal attachment of the frenum. The

fibers can be seen extending to the papilla between the
central incisors, with branching auxiliary fibers inserting into
the marginal tissue.
The maxillary anterior frenum connects the upper lip
to the suture line areas between the central incisors. The
importance of a frenum that prevents aesthetic contact
of the central incisors has been the subject of debate. The
literature indicates that a diastema may be considered
normal as the maxillary central incisors erupt and can
be expected to close as the other permanent front teeth
erupt. Seldom has any correlation been found between a
maxillary frenum problem and recession.

FRENOTOMY AND FRENECTOMY
A frenotomy involves an incision of the periosteal fiber
attachment and possibly suturing of the frenum to the
periosteum at the base of the vestibule. It is associated
with less postoperative discomfort than a frenectomy
and will usually suffice. A frenectomy involves complete
excision of the frenum and its periosteal attachment. A
frenectomy is indicated when large, fleshy frena are involved. The need for a frenectomy or frenotomy should
be based on the individual’s ability to maintain gingival
health. The surgical management of the abnormal maxillary labial frenum is presented in Chapter 3 (see Figs.
3-50 to 3-52).
Indications for treating a high frenum include the following:
  
1.	A high frenum attachment associated with an area of
persistent gingival inflammation that has not responded to root planing and good oral hygiene
2.	A frenum associated with an area of recession that is
progressive
3.	A high maxillary frenum and an associated midline
diastema that persist after complete eruption of the
permanent canines
4.	A mandibular lingual frenum that inhibits the tongue
from touching the maxillary central incisors. This
would interfere with the child’s ability to make /t/, /d/,
and /l/ sounds. As long as the child has enough range
of motion to raise the tongue to the roof of the mouth,
no surgery would be indicated. Most children cannot
normally make these sounds until after 6 or 7 years of
age. Speech therapy may be indicated (see Fig. 7-45).
  

Chapter 14

n

Gingivitis and Periodontal Disease

265

If a high frenum is associated with an area of no or
minimal keratinized gingiva and a frenotomy or frenectomy is indicated, a gingival graft or vestibular extension should be used to augment the procedure. Under
these circumstances, a frenotomy or frenectomy often
does not create stable long-term results. Bohannan indicated that, if there is an adequate band of attached
gingiva, high frena and vestibular depth do not pose a
problem.75-77 Use of the latter procedures to accomplish
elimination of the frenum pull is considered a more
standard approach.

TECHNIQUES FOR MANDIBULAR FRENECTOMY
AND VESTIBULAR DEPTH INCREASE
Bohannan has published a series of reports of his studies
in the alteration of vestibular depth and frenectomy.75-77
Three different surgical procedures, which he refers to as
complete denudation, periosteum retention, and vestibular incision, were studied as methods to produce increased
vestibular depth and frenum alteration.

A

Complete Denudation
The complete denudation procedure is preceded by a
routine gingivectomy extending laterally to the first premolars. By blunt dissection, the periosteum and adherent
fibrous tissue are detached apically, and the labial plate is
exposed to a depth of approximately 12 mm. The resulting soft-tissue flap is removed by excision. A rapid-setting
dressing is placed directly over the osseous tissue and is
changed at 7-day intervals for 4 weeks.

B

Periosteum Retention
The periosteum retention procedure, as carried out by
Bohannan, does not always result in maintenance of the
desirable amount of vestibular depth.76 The procedure is
essentially the same as that described previously, except
that the periosteum is retained.

Vestibular Incision
The vestibular incision method (mandibular frenectomy)
is a surgical procedure that has been used with success.
The elimination of the abnormal frenum should remain
the objective of the procedure, although it is often desirable to alter the vestibular depth also. However, the frenum is the primary etiologic factor in the stripping of the
gingival tissue and labial pocket formation.
A preliminary prophylactic procedure should be performed to remove hard deposits, debris, and plaque
material from the teeth. The surgical procedure should
be more extensive than a conservative incision of the
frenum. Such a procedure would allow the muscle fibers to reattach, with resultant scar tissue formation,
and would perhaps make the condition more severe
(Fig. 14-30, A-C).
A local anesthetic is given before the surgical procedure.
Administration of a right and a left inferior alveolar injection is the method of choice. Some dentists prefer to inject the local anesthetic solution throughout the operative
field. However, caution should be exercised because the
anesthetic may distend the tissue, which makes it more
difficult to find landmarks during the surgical procedure.

C
Figure 14-30 A, Tissue has been stripped and a pocket
formed on the labial surface of the right central incisor. A
frenectomy procedure to increase the depth of the vestibular trough is indicated. B, An incision has been made and
a pack has been placed and secured with three sutures.
C, Three months after the operation, improvement in the
health of the gingival tissue in the mandibular anterior
region is evident.

The lower lip should be stretched outward and downward, and an incision approximately 1 cm in depth beyond the level of the vestibular trough should be made at
a right angle to the underlying bone. The incision is made
at the junction of the mucobuccal fold and attached

266

Chapter 14

n

Gingivitis and Periodontal Disease

A

B

C

D

Figure 14-31 A, Stripping of the tissue and loss of alveolar bone from the labial aspect of the mandibular right central incisor
are related to an abnormal frenum attachment and shallow vestibule. B, An incision has been made, and the connective tissue
and muscle attachments have been freed by blunt dissection. C, One week after the operation, there is evidence of granulation tissue. D, An improvement is evident in the gingival contour of the tissue surrounding the right central incisor.

gingiva, and should extend at least two teeth on either
side of the attachment. If the abnormal attachment is
on the incisor area, an incision is often made from an
area opposite one canine to the canine on the other side
of the mouth. The connective tissue and muscle attachments are then freed by blunt dissection with a periosteal
elevator (Fig. 14-31, A-C). No attempt is made to strip the
underlying periosteum.
A periodontal pack or some type of splint must be used
to prevent reattachment of the tissue and to allow granulation to occur at a greater depth. A piece of rubber tubing
2 to 3 mm in diameter and the exact length of the incision can be coated with surgical paste and sutured in the
trough. The patient is seen 24 hours postoperatively, and
any granulation tissue that has developed over the ends
of the tubing is removed. The pack is normally removed
after 4 or 5 days, and the wound is irrigated as necessary
until healing occurs.
As an alternative method of encouraging healing at
a new depth, the entire surgical wound is filled with
a stiff periodontal dressing of the zinc oxide–eugenol
type. The pack, which extends over the labial surfaces
of the anterior teeth, may be covered with dry foil and
allowed to remain for 3 to 4 weeks with only weekly
changes. Some dentists ligate an acrylic splint to the
teeth after surgery to aid in the reestablishment of the
new sulcular depth.

FREE GINGIVAL AUTOGRAFT PROCEDURE
The free gingival autograft procedure (FGG) may be considered for children and young adults when there is a
prominent tooth position that is complicated by the absence of attached gingiva, a shallow vestibular fornix, and
a high midline frenum attachment (Fig. 14-32). FGG is also
indicated when there are areas of root exposure that are of
aesthetic concern to the patient, when the labial gingivae
of some teeth require subgingival crown margins, when
teeth are clasped by a removable partial denture having
a narrow zone of gingiva, and when teeth that have no
labial keratinized gingiva need orthodontic movement,
which makes them more prominent in the arch. When
these indications are kept in mind, it will be apparent to
the clinician that FGG is not always the best procedure.
There may be an aesthetic concern with the surrounding
gingiva because the autograft will remain the same color
and texture as the palatal donor site (Fig. 14-33). If root
coverage and esthetics is the goal, the connective tissue
graft, laterally positioned pedicle graft, and coronally positioned flap procedures are preferrable. When the amount
of attached gingiva is adequate, FGG is not indicated. If
pocket elimination is a concern, an apically repositioned
flap should be a choice.
In FGG the receptor site is first prepared. When a high
frenum attachment has contributed to the mucogingival

Chapter 14

n

Gingivitis and Periodontal Disease

267

Figure 14-32 The free gingival graft procedure may be considered for children and adults when there is a shallow vestibular

fornix and a high midline frenum attachment.

268

Chapter 14

n

Gingivitis and Periodontal Disease

By 7 to 10 days, the graft should be firmly fixed to
the underlying receptor site, and the epithelial covering
should be continuous with that of the contiguous gingiva
and oral mucosa. The patient is instructed to gently clean
away any debris from the area with a cotton ball soaked
in warm water and to continue the interdental flossing
routine. Normal brushing can usually be reintroduced between 21 and 25 days after the graft is placed.

LASERS

Figure 14-33 Two-year clinical postoperative appearance

of a free gingival graft. Note the color mismatch of the free
gingival graft with the surrounding soft tissue.

problem, tension is placed on the lower lip to activate
the frenum and trace its insertion into the marginal tissue. A horizontal incision is made at the mucogingival
junction, including the attachment of the frenum to the
gingiva. The mucosa is displaced apically by blunt dissection, and a non-movable receptor site is left consisting of
periosteum and a thin covering of firm connective tissue.
Any gingival epithelium coronal to the primary incision
is trimmed away, which leaves a receptor bed of connective tissue with an adequate blood supply.
The next step is to fenestrate the periosteum to help
prevent mobility of the graft after healing. To do this, two
horizontal incisions, 1 mm apart, are made through the
periosteum at the apical boundary of the displaced mucosa. The isolated periosteum between the two horizontal
incisions is peeled away so that the facial cortical plate of
bone is exposed. A template of adhesive foil slightly larger
than the mandibular receptor site is made, and the palatal
donor site is anesthetized. The template is placed on the
anesthetized tissue and is outlined with a shallow incision. The graft is freed from the underlying submucosa by
sharp dissection. The operator should strive to secure an
intermediate-thickness graft (approximately 1 mm thick).
After the graft is removed from the palate, the connective tissue side is inspected to ensure that no fatty
tissue remains on it (adherent fatty tissue would prevent
revascularization of the graft from the connective tissue
of the receptor site). If present, the fatty tissue is carefully dissected from the graft. The graft is carried to the
receptor site, and any final trimming is done to secure an
approximation of the donor tissue to the receptor site.
The graft is stabilized onto the recipient site using a thin
non-resorbable or resorbable suture with an atraumatic
(taper) needle. Multiple sling sutures, horizontal sutures,
and interrupted sutures are routinely needed to secure
and immobilize the graft over the recipient site. Depending on the case, a periodontal dressing may be placed over
the graft to protect it. When the patient returns 7 to 10
days after surgery, the dressing (if previously applied) is
removed, the area is debrided and irrigated, and the sutures are removed.

Within the last few decades, lasers have been accepted as a
novel treatment modality for a wide array of intraoral procedures, including, but not limited to: preparation of teeth for
restorative purposes, pulpotomies, and obtaining incisional
or excisional soft-tissue biopsies. The term “laser” stands for
“light amplification by stimulated emission of radiation.”
The “light” is not limited to visible light but also refers to
electromagnetic radiation of any frequency—infrared, ultraviolet, x-ray, etc. “Light” is amplified when “an active element undergoes stimulated quantum transitions that create
the energy beam.”78 This energy beam, in turn, is a monochromatic (light of one wavelength), unidirectional, highly
collimated, tightly focused beam that is directed against
the targeted area. Upon absorption of the laser wavelength,
the light energy is converted into thermal energy (heat) in
the affected tissue, thereby triggering a photothermal effect.
In other words, as heat builds up in the affected tissue, the
targeted area will undergo physical and biological changes:
coagulation at 65°C to 90°C, protein denaturation at 90°C
to 100°C, or vaporization over 100°C.79
In biology, numerous biological tissues and molecules
have absorption spectra in the ultraviolet, infrared, and
visible wavelengths. This is important because a laser’s biological effect is dependent on the targeted tissue’s affinity to a specific wavelength of laser energy.78 For instance,
a CO2 laser wavelength (10,600 nm) is readily absorbed
by tissue that has high water content. Because over 75%
of the soft tissue is composed of water, the energy beam
emitted from a CO2 laser is readily absorbed by soft tissue. This makes a CO2 laser ideal in soft-tissue excisional
procedures, such as frenectomies, operculum removal, or
soft-tissue lesion biopsies. In comparison, an Nd:YAG laser
emits an energy beam at 1064 nm and is also absorbed
by tissue high in water content but not as readily as a
CO2 laser. However, unlike a CO2 laser, an Nd:YAG laser is
readily absorbed by pigmented soft tissue. This makes an
Nd:YAG laser practical in cases where pigmented tissues,
pigmented lesions, or hemorrhagic lesions need to be excised. Additionally, the heating effect of the Nd:YAG laser
is ideal in stimulating coagulation because small capillaries
and small venules have a high affinity for this wavelength.
A diode laser (819 nm) is similar to the Nd:YAG laser in its
affinity for pigmented tissues and hemorrhagic tissues. In
contrast, an Er:YAG laser (2940 nm) and Er,Cr:YSGG laser
(2780 nm) emit wavelengths that have a strong affinity for
tissue with high water content and/or high hydroxyapatite content. Because of this, Er:YAG and Er,Cr:YSGG lasers
are more appropriate for soft-tissue removal procedures,
removal of osseous tissue, and cavity preparations.
A laser procedure known as LANAP (i.e., “laser-assisted
new attachment procedure”) has been introduced as an

Chapter 14

Initial

A
Mary Jones

13%

Gingivitis and Periodontal Disease

269

70%

April 21, 2004

8%

B
Mary Jones

n

June 9, 2004

alternative to conventional periodontal therapy for the
treatment of chronic periodontitis.80 The key feature of
LANAP is the Nd:YAG laser, which is used to deliver a
highly focused and intense beam of energy to the targeted tissue. This has several advantages. First, because
the Nd:YAG laser emits an energy beam that is readily absorbed by inflamed, hemorrhagic tissue, the diseased pocket epithelium is ablated while healthy tissue is preserved.
Second, because the Nd:YAG laser is attracted to pigment,
the laser wavelength is readily absorbed by pathogenic
black-pigmented bacteria (such as Porphyromonas and Prevotella spp), thereby inducing a bactericidal effect. Third,
because the Nd:YAG is readily absorbed by blood vessels,
coagulation is achieved at the treated site. The thermal
fibrin clot, in turn, creates a physical barrier that prevents
epithelial downgrowth and creates conditions within the
subgingival environment that favor periodontal regeneration. Yet although LANAP shows great potential, evidence
to support the use of lasers to treat periodontitis is scarce
and inconclusive.81 Further research is still necessary to

Figure 14-34 A, Plaque accumulations recorded at the initial control appointment.
B, Plaque accumulations recorded at the
fifth session.

determine the effectiveness and predictability of lasers to
treat periodontitis.

CLINICAL ASSESSMENT OF ORAL
CLEANLINESS AND PERIODONTAL
DISEASE
PLAQUE CONTROL RECORD
O’Leary and colleagues developed the plaque control record to give the dentist, hygienist, and dental educator a
simple method of recording the presence of plaque on individual tooth surfaces (mesial, distal, facial, and lingual).82
At the initial appointment, a suitable disclosing solution,
such as Bismarck brown, is painted on all exposed tooth
surfaces. After the patient has rinsed, the operator, using
an explorer, examines each stained surface for soft accumulations at the dentogingival junction. When found, these
­accumulations are recorded by making a dash in the appropriate spaces on the record form. Figure 14-34, A shows a

270

Chapter 14

n

Gingivitis and Periodontal Disease

form completed at the patient’s first appointment for learning plaque control. No attempt is made to differentiate
among the various amounts of plaque on tooth surfaces.
After all teeth are examined and scored, an index can
be derived when the number of plaque-containing surfaces is divided by the total number of available surfaces.
The same procedure is carried out at subsequent appointments to determine the patient’s progress in learning
and carrying out the prescribed oral hygiene procedures.
Figure 14-34, B shows a patient’s progress from the initial
assessment to the point (fifth session) at which plaque
control is deemed satisfactory.
[A detailed approach to the teaching of toothbrushing,
flossing, and plaque control is described in Chapter 7.)

PERIODONTAL SCREENING AND RECORDING
As noted in Chapter 1, it is recommended to use the
periodontal screening and recording (PSR) method to
facilitate the early detection of periodontal diseases in
children. Clerehugh and Tugnait recommend using PSR
for pediatric dental patients following the eruption of
the permanent incisors and first molars.83 They suggest
routine screening for new pediatric patients and at regular re-care appointments so that periodontal problems
are detected early and treated appropriately. Immunodeficient children are especially vulnerable to early loss of
bone support.
Although PSR was originally designed for use in
adults, it has been found to be an effective method of
detecting early signs of periodontal disease among certain children who may be at higher risk. PSR is not a
substitute for a comprehensive periodontal examination, but it should help the clinician efficiently identify the few child or adolescent patients who need a
comprehensive periodontal evaluation. In addition, the
possibility of false readings caused by gingival pseudo
pocketing must be considered because pseudo pocketing
is more frequent in young patients.
For purposes of recording the results of PSR, the dentition is divided into six areas (sextants): two anterior
sextants (maxillary and mandibular) and four posterior
sextants (right and left maxillary and mandibular). The
gingival sulcus depth of each tooth or implant is measured in at least six areas (three facial and three lingual
areas) by gentle probing with a periodontal probe in
the standard manner. Each sextant is scored for periodontal health based on a code number from 0 to 4 as
follows:
  
•	Code 0 indicates that all sulcus depths in the sextant
are 3.5 mm or less, and no calculus is present and no
gingival bleeding occurred from the gentle probing.
•	Code 1 indicates that all sulcus depths are 3.5 mm or
less, and no calculus is present but some bleeding occurred from the gentle probing.
•	Code 2 indicates that all sulcus depths are 3.5 mm or
less, and some calculus is present. Supra or subgingival calculus and/or defective margins are detected.
•	Code 3 indicates that one or more sulcus depths are
between 3.5 and 5.5 mm.
•	Code 4 indicates that one or more sulcus depths are
more than 5.5 mm.
  

In addition to the code number, an asterisk (*) may
accompany the code score to indicate furcation involvement, abnormal tooth mobility, muco-gingival problems,
or significant gingival recession.
Appropriate preventive care, oral hygiene instruction, and therapy (plaque and calculus removal) are indicated, as required, for patients who receive PSR code
scores of 2, 1, or 0. Patients receiving code scores of 3 or
4 require more comprehensive periodontal evaluation
and treatment.

EXTRINSIC STAINS AND DEPOSITS
ON TEETH
Previous work regarding the staining of children’s teeth
has been related primarily to studies of orange and green
stain of the extrinsic type. It has been generally accepted
that this stain is of microbial origin, although some reports have indicated that oral iron preparations or other
medications may be responsible for an additional type of
extrinsic staining. The accumulation of dental deposits
and stains is affected by salivary composition and flow
rates, poor oral hygiene, enamel defects, and aging with
exposed extrinsic factors (medications, coffee, tea, tobacco, and intrinsic physiological changes). Extrinsic stains
are identified by color, distribution, and tenaciousness
along with age, gender, and home care.
Staining is generally believed to be caused by extrinsic
agents, which can be readily removed from tooth surfaces with an abrasive material. The agents responsible for
staining are deposited in enamel defects or become attached to the enamel without bringing about a change in
its surface. Pigmentation, in contrast to extrinsic staining,
is associated with an active chemical change in the tooth
structure, and the resulting pigment cannot be removed
without alteration of the tooth structure.

GREEN STAIN
The cause of green stain, which is most often seen on the
teeth of children, is unknown, although it is believed to
be the result of the action of chromogenic bacteria on
the enamel cuticle. Boys are more frequently affected
than girls. The color of the stain varies from dark green to
light yellowish-green. This tenacious deposit is seen most
often in the gingival third of the labial surfaces of the
maxillary anterior teeth. The stain collects more readily
on the labial surfaces of the maxillary anterior teeth in
mouth breathers. It tends to recur even after careful and
complete removal. The enamel beneath the stain may be
roughened or may have undergone initial demineralization. The roughening of the surface is believed to be related to the frequency of recurrence of the stain (Fig. 14-35).
Fungi (Penicillium and Aspergillus) and fluorescent bacteria
have been associated with the discoloration.

ORANGE STAIN
The cause of orange stain is likewise unknown. Orange
stain occurs less frequently and is more easily removed
than green or brown stain. The stain is most often seen in
the gingival third of the tooth and is associated with poor
oral hygiene (Fig. 14-36).

Chapter 14

Figure 14-35 Dark green stain is evident on maxillary

anterior teeth. Papillary and marginal gingivitis is also present. The patient had poor oral hygiene and was a mouthbreather.

n

Gingivitis and Periodontal Disease

271

Figure 14-37 Black stain is evident on the primary teeth.

The stain is difficult to remove, particularly when it collects
in roughened areas of the tooth.

often seen in a mouth in which there is poor oral hygiene,
improving the oral hygiene minimizes the recurrence of
the stain.

PIGMENTATION CAUSED BY STANNOUS
FLUORIDE APPLICATION
During the first clinical trials involving the topical application of an 8% stannous fluoride solution, certain areas
of the tooth became discolored. A characteristic pigmentation of both caries and pre-caries lesions has been found
to be associated with exposure to stannous fluoride.

CALCULUS

Figure 14-36 Orange stain is evident in the gingival half of

the maxillary left posterior teeth.

BLACK STAIN
A black stain occasionally develops on the primary or permanent teeth of children, but it is much less common
than the orange or green type (Fig. 14-37). A thin black
line of dots or band of stain may be seen following the
gingival contour or it may be apparent in a more generalized pattern on the clinical crown, particularly if there are
roughened or pitted areas. The black stain is difficult to
remove, especially if it collects in pitted areas. It has been
reported more frequently in females. Many children who
have black stain are relatively free of dental caries and
have excellent oral hygiene. The chromogenic bacterium
primarily associated with this stain is Actinomyces.84

REMOVAL OF EXTRINSIC STAINS
Extrinsic stains can be removed by polishing with a rubber cup and flour pumice. If the stain is resistant and difficult to remove, the excess water should be blotted from
the pumice and the teeth should be dried before the polishing procedure is performed. Because stains are most

Calculus is not often seen in preschool children, and
even in children of grade-school age, it occurs with much
lower frequency than in adult patients. A low caries incidence is related to high calculus incidence. Bhat reported
findings in 14- to 17-year-old children who participated
in the 1986-1987 National Survey of Oral Health.85 Supragingival calculus was observed in nearly 34% of the
children and subgingival calculus in approximately 23%.
Both types showed a predilection for molars in the maxilla and incisors and canines in the mandible. Children
with mental retardation often have accumulations of calculus on their teeth. This accumulation may be related
to abnormal muscular function, a soft diet, poor oral hygiene, and stagnation of saliva.
The observations reported by Turesky and colleagues
regarding early calculus formation in children and adults
substantiate those of others and indicate that calculus
begins as a soft, adherent, bacteria-laden plaque that undergoes progressive calcification.86 They observed calculus
formation on cellulose acetate strips that were fixed in
children’s mouths. Plaque material that accumulated on
the strips underwent progressive hardening. A soft plaque
material consisted, for the most part, of bacteria appearing
as a dense meshwork of diffusely distributed gram-negative
cocci with occasional rod forms. Filamentous or threadshaped organisms were scarce. Leukocytes and epithelial
cells were also scattered within the amorphous matrix.

272

Chapter 14

n

Gingivitis and Periodontal Disease

Supragingival deposits of calculus occur most frequently and in greater quantity on the buccal surfaces of
the maxillary molars and the lingual surfaces of the mandibular anterior teeth. These areas are near the openings
of the major salivary glands. Local factors are unquestionably important in the initiation of calculus formation.

REFERENCES
1.	Delaney JE: Periodontal and soft-tissue abnormalities, Dent
Clin North Am 39:837–850, 1995.
2.	Armitage G: Development of a classification system for periodontal disease and conditions, Ann Periodontol 4:1–6, 1999.
3.	American Academy of Pediatric Dentistry: Reference manual
2013-2014, Pediatr Dent 35(6 Suppl):338–345, 2013.
4.	Eastcott AD, Stallard RE: Sequential changes in developing
human dental plaque as visualized by scanning electron microscope, J Periodontol 44:218–224, 1973.
5.	Suomi JD, et al.: Oral calculus in children, J Periodontol
42:341–345, 1971.
6.	Weddell JA, Klein AI: Socioeconomic correlation of oral
disease in 6- to 36-month children, Pediatr Dent 3:306–310,
1981.
7.	Horowitz AM, et al.: Effects of supervised daily dental plaque
removal by children after 3 years, Community Dent Oral Epidemiol 8:171–176, 1980.
8.	Murray JJ: The prevalence of gingivitis in children continuously resident in a high fluoride area, J Dent Child 41:133–139,
1974.
9.	Matsson L, Moller C: Gingival inflammatory reactions in
children with rhinoconjunctivitis due to birch pollinosis,
Scand J Dent Res 98:504–509, 1990.
10.	Schaaf JE: Non-dental pharmacotherapeutics, Alumni Bull
Sch Dent Indiana Univ Spring 48–53, 1984.
11.	Faden H: Management of primary herpetic gingivostomatitis
in young children, Pediatr Emerg Care 22(4):268, 2006.
12.	Hale BD, et al.: Epidemic herpetic stomatitis in orphanage
children, Dent Abst 8:556, 1963.
13.	Kleinman DV, et al.: Epidemiology of oral mucosal lesions in
United States schoolchilden: 1986-87, Community Dent Oral
Epidemiol 22:243–253, 1994.
14.	Griffith RS, Norins AL, Kagan C: A multicentered study of
lysine therapy in herpes simplex infection, Dermatologica
156:257–267, 1978.
15.	Brooks SL, et al.: Prevalence of herpes simplex virus disease in
a professional population, J Am Dent Assoc 102:31–34, 1981.
16.	Scully C, Porter S: Oral mucosal disease: recurrent aphthous
stomatitis, Br J Oral Maxillofac Surg 46:198–206, 2008.
17.	Ship JA, et al.: Recurrent aphthous stomatitis, Quintessence
Int 31:95–112, 2000.
18.	Antoon JW, Miller RL: Aphthous ulcers: a review of the literature on etiology, pathogenesis, diagnosis, and treatment,
J Am Dent Assoc 101:803–808, 1980.
19.	Greenspan JA, et al.: Lymphocyte function in recurrent aphthous ulceration, J Oral Pathol 14:592–602, 1985.
20.	Binnie WH, et al.: Amlexanox oral paste: a novel treatment
that accelerates the healing of aphthous ulcers, Compendium
Contin Educ Dent 18:1116-1118, 1120-1122, 1124–1126, 1997.
21.	Meiller TF, et al.: Effect of an antimicrobial mouth rinse
on recurrent aphthous ulcerations, Oral Surg Oral Med Oral
Pathol 72:425–429, 1991.
22.	Glauser RO, et al.: An unusual gingivitis among Navajo Indians, Periodontics 1:255–259, 1963.
23.	Grossman E, Reiter G, Sturzenberger OP: Six-month study
of the effects of chlorhexidine mouthrinse on gingivitis in
adults, J Periodontal Res 21:33, 1986.

24.	Banting D, Bosma M, Bollmer B: Clinical effectiveness of a
0.12% chlorhexidine mouthrinse over two years, J Dent Res
68:1716, 1989.
25.	Quirynen M, et al.: Effect of different chlorhexidine formulations in mouthrinses on de novo plaque formation, J Clin
Periodontol 28:1127–1136, 2001.
26.	Löe H, Schiött CR: The effect of mouthrinses and topical
application of chlorhexidine on the development of dental
plaque and gingivitis in man, J Periodontal Res 5:79–83, 1970.
27.	Yankell SL, et al.: Laboratory and clinical stain removal evaluations of two tartar control dentifrices, J Clin Dent 6:207–210,
1995.
28.	Brecx M, et al.: Efficacy of Listerine, Meridol and chlorhexidine mouthrinses as supplements to regular tooth-cleaning
measures, J Clin Periodontol 19:202–207, 1992.
29.	Barnett ML: The rationale for the daily use of an antimicrobial mouthrinse, J Am Dent Assoc 137(7 Suppl):16S–21S,
2006.
30.	Cohen MM: The effect of large doses of ascorbic acid on gingival tissue at puberty, J Dent Res 34:750–751, 1955 (abstract).
31.	Nakagawa S, et al.: A longitudinal study from prepuberty to
puberty of gingivitis, J Clin Periodontol 21:658–665, 1994.
32.	Sutcliffe P: A longitudinal study of gingivitis and puberty,
J Periodontal Res 7:52–58, 1972.
33.	De Pommereau V, et al.: Periodontal status in insulin-­
dependent diabetic adolescents, J Clin Periodontol 19:
628–632, 1992.
34.	Zackin SJ, Weisberger D: Hereditary gingival fibromatosis: report of a family, Oral Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol 14:825–835,
1961.
35.	Brown RS, et al.: Treatment of a patient with hereditary gingival fibromatosis: a case report, Spec Care Dentist 15:149–153,
1995.
36.	Kimball OP: Treatment of epilepsy with sodium diphenylhydantoinate, J Am Med Assoc 112:1244–1245, 1939.
37.	Castetta I, et al.: Phenytoin-induced gingival overgrowth, a
community-based cross-sectional study in Ferrara, Italy, Neuroepidemiology 16:296–303, 1997.
38.	Hassell T, et al.: Diphenylhydantoin (Dilantin) gingival hyperplasia: drug-induced abnormality of connective tissue,
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 73:2909–2912, 1976.
39.	Addy V, et al.: Risk factors in phenytoin-induced gingival
hyperplasia, J Periodontol 54:373–377, 1983.
40.	Kapur RN, et al.: Diphenylhydantoin-induced gingival hyperplasia: its relationship to dose and serum level, Dev Med
Child Neurol 15:483–487, 1973.
41.	Little RM, et al.: Diphenylhydantoin-induced gingival hyperplasia: its response to changes in drug dosage, Dev Med
Child Neurol 17:421–424, 1975.
42.	Livingston S, et al.: The medical treatment of epilepsy: managing side effects of antiepileptic drugs, Pediatr Ann 8:261–266,
1979.
43.	Ciancio SG, et al.: Gingival hyperplasia and diphenylhydantoin, J Periodontol 43:411–414, 1972.
44.	Sasaki T, Maita E: Increased BfGF level in the serum of patients with phenytoin-induced gingival overgrowth, J Clin
Periodontol 25:42–47, 1998.
45.	Jones JE, et al.: Incidence and indications for surgical management of phenytoin-induced gingival overgrowth in a cerebral palsy population, J Oral Maxillofac Surg 46:385–390,
1988.
46.	Steinberg SC, Steinberg AD: Phenytoin-induced gingival
overgrowth control in severely retarded children, J Periodontol 53:429–433, 1982.
47.	Donnenfeld OW, et al.: A nine-month clinical and histological study of patients on diphenyl hydantoin following gingivectomy, J Periodontol 45:547–557, 1974.

Chapter 14

48.	Davis RK, et al.: A preliminary report on a new therapy for
Dilantin gingival hyperplasia, J Periodontol 34:17–22, 1963.
49.	Sheridan PJ, Reeve CM: Effective treatment of Dilantin gingival hyperplasia, Oral Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol 35:42–46,
1973.
50.	Steinberg AD: Clinical management of phenytoin-induced
gingival overgrowth in handicapped children, Pediatr Dent
3(Spec Iss):130–136, 1981.
51.	Drew HJ, et al.: Effect of folate on phenytoin hyperplasia,
J Clin Periodontol 14:350–356, 1987.
52.	Bäckman N, et al.: Folate treatment of diphenylhydantoininduced gingival hyperplasia, Scand J Dent Res 97:222–232,
1989.
53.	American Academy of Periodontology: Parameter on aggressive periodontitis, J Periodontol 71(Suppl):867, 2000.
54.	Albandar JM, et al.: Clinical features of early-onset periodontitis, J Am Dent Assoc 128:1393–1399, 1997.
55.	Löe H, Brown LJ: Early onset of periodontitis in the United
States of America, J Periodontol 62:608–616, 1991.
56.	Deas DE, et al.: Systemic disease and periodontitis: manifestations of neutrophil dysfunction, Periodontol 2000 32:82, 2003.
57.	Asikainen S, et al.: Can one acquire periodontal bacteria
and periodontitis from a family member? J Am Dent Assoc
128:1263–1270, 1997.
58.	Page RC, et al.: Clinical and laboratory studies of a family
with a high prevalence of juvenile periodontitis, J Periodontol
56:602–610, 1985.
59.	Christersson LA, et al.: Microbiological and clinical effects of
surgical treatment of localized juvenile periodontitis, J Clin
Periodontol 12:465–476, 1985.
60.	Goepferd SJ: Advanced alveolar bone loss in the primary
dentition: a case report, J Periodontol 52:753–757, 1981.
61.	Coccia CT, et al.: Papillon-Lefèvre syndrome: precocious
periodontosis with palmar-plantar hyperkeratosis, J Periodontol 37:408–414, 1966.
62.	Canger EM, et al.: Intraoral findings of Papillon-Lefevre syndrome, J Dent Child 75:99–103, 2008.
63.	Gorlin RJ, et al.: The syndrome of palmar-plantar hyperkeratosis and premature periodontal destruction of the teeth,
J Pediatr 65:895–908, 1964.
64.	Tinanoff N, et al.: Dental treatment of Papillon-Lefèvre syndrome: 15-year follow-up, J Clin Periodontol 22:609–612, 1995.
65.	Plesset DN: Auto-extraction, Oral Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol
12:302–303, 1959.
66.	Leksell E, Edvardson S: A case of Tourette syndrome presenting with oral self-injurious behaviour, Int J Paediatr Dent
15(5):370–374, 2005.
67.	Krejci CB: Self-inflicted gingival injury due to habitual fingernail biting, J Periodontol 71:1029–1031, 2000.

n

Gingivitis and Periodontal Disease

273

68.	Stewart DJ, Kernohan DC: Traumatic gingival recession
in infants: the result of a dummy sucking habit, Br Dent J
135:157–158, 1973.
69.	Friedlander AH, et al.: The neuropathology, medical management and dental implications of autism, J Am Dent Assoc
137:1517–1527, 2006.
70.	Littlewood SJ, Mitchell L: The dental problems and management of a patient suffering from congenital insensitivity to
pain, Int J Paediatr Dent 8:47–50, 1998.
71.	Cusumano FJ, et al.: Prevention of self-mutilation in patients
with Lesch-Nyhan syndrome: review of literature, J Dent
Child 68:175–178, 2001.
72.	Henry SW, et al.: Histologic features of the superior labial
frenum, J Periodontol 47:25–28, 1976.
73.	Ross, et al.: Histologic survey of the frena of the oral cavity,
Quintessence Int 20:233–347, 1990.
74.	Suter V, Bornstein MM: Ankyloglossia: facts and myths in
diagnosis and treatment, J Periodontol 80(8):1204–1219,
2009.
75.	Bohannan HM: Studies in the alteration of vestibular depth.
I, Complete denudation, J Periodontol 33:120–128, 1962.
76.	Bohannan HM: Studies in the alteration of vestibular depth.
II, Periosteum retention, J Periodontol 33:354–359, 1962.
77.	Bohannan HM: III: Vestibular incision, J Periodontol 34:
209–215, 1963.
78.	Cobb C: AAP-Commissioned Review: Lasers in periodontics: a review of the literature, J Periodontol 77(4):545–564,
2006.
79.	
American Academy of Periodontology Academy Report:
­Lasers in periodontics, J Periodontol 73(10):1231–1239, 2002.
80.	Gregg RH, McCarthy D: Laser periodontal therapy for bone
regeneration, Dent Today 21:54–59, 2002.
81.	American Academy of Periodontology: Statement on the efficacy of lasers in non-surgical treatment of inflammatory
periodontal disease, J Periodontol 82(4):513–514, 2011.
82.	O’Leary TJ, et al.: The plaque control record, J Periodontol
43:38, 1972.
83.	Clerehugh V, Tugnait A: Periodontal diseases in children
and adolescents: I. Aetiology and diagnosis, Dent Update 28:
222–230, 232, 2001.
84.	Slots J: The microflora of black stain on primary teeth, Scand
J Dent Res 82:484–490, 1974.
85.	Bhat M: Periodontal health of 14- to 17-year-old US schoolchildren, J Public Health Dent 51:5–11, 1991.
86.	Turesky S, et al.: Histologic and histochemical observations
regarding early calculus formation in children and adults,
J Periodontol 32:7–14, 1961.

PART

3

CHAPTER

15

PAIN CONTROL AND BEHAVIOR GUIDANCE

Local Anesthesia and Pain
Control for the Child
and Adolescent
s James E. Jones and Jeffrey A. Dean

For additional resources, please visit the

website.

CHAPTER OUTLINE
TOPICAL ANESTHETICS
JET INJECTION
LOCAL ANESTHESIA BY
CONVENTIONAL INJECTION
ANESTHETIZATION OF MANDIBULAR
TEETH AND SOFT TISSUE
Inferior Alveolar Nerve Block
(Conventional Mandibular Block)
Lingual Nerve Block
Long Buccal Nerve Block
Infiltration Anesthesia for
Mandibular Primary Molars
Infiltration for Mandibular Incisors
Mandibular Conduction Anesthesia
(Gow-Gates Mandibular Block
Technique)

I

ANESTHETIZATION OF MAXILLARY
PRIMARY AND PERMANENT
INCISORS AND CANINES
Supraperiosteal Technique (Local
Infiltration)
ANESTHETIZATION OF MAXILLARY
PRIMARY MOLARS AND
PREMOLARS
ANESTHETIZATION OF MAXILLARY
PERMANENT MOLARS
ANESTHETIZATION OF THE PALATAL
TISSUES
Nasopalatine Nerve Block
Greater (Anterior) Palatine
Injection

t is generally agreed that one of the most important
aspects of child behavior guidance in the dental office is the control of pain during dental procedures.
If children experience pain during restorative or surgical
procedures, their future as dental patients may be damaged. Therefore it is important at each visit to reduce discomfort to a minimum and to control painful situations.
There are many pharmacologic pain control strategies to
help children cope with these situations, both preoperatively and postoperatively. Most of these strategies involve the use of local anesthetics or analgesics.
Because there is usually some discomfort associated
with the procedure, use of a local anesthetic is generally
indicated when operative work is to be performed on the
permanent teeth, and the same is true of cavity preparations in primary teeth. Dental procedures can be carried
out more effectively if the child is comfortable and free
of pain. The local anesthetic can prevent discomfort that

274

SUPPLEMENTAL INJECTION
TECHNIQUES
Infraorbital Nerve Block and Mental
Nerve Block
Periodontal Ligament Injection
(Intraligamentary Injection)
Intraosseous Injection, Interseptal
Injection, and Intrapulpal Injection
Computer-Controlled Local
Anesthetic Delivery System (Wand)
COMPLICATIONS AFTER A LOCAL
ANESTHETIC
Anesthetic Toxicity
Trauma to Soft Tissue
REVERSAL OF DENTAL ANESTHESIA
ANALGESICS

may be associated with placing a rubber dam clamp, ligating teeth, and cutting tooth structure. Even the youngest
child treated in the dental office normally has no contraindications for the use of a local anesthetic.
Investigators have found that injection is the dental
procedure that produces the greatest negative response in
children. Responses become increasingly negative over a
series of four or five injections. Venham and Quatrocelli1
have reported that a series of dental visits sensitized children to the stressful injection procedure while reducing
their apprehension toward relatively nonstressful procedures. Thus dentists should anticipate the need for continued efforts to help the child cope with dental injections.

TOPICAL ANESTHETICS
Topical anesthetics reduce the slight discomfort that may
be associated with the insertion of the needle before the

Chapter 15

n

injection of the local anesthetic. Some topical anesthetics, however, present a disadvantage if they have a disagreeable taste. Also, the additional time required to apply
them may increase the child’s apprehension concerning
the approaching procedure.
Topical anesthetics are available in gel, liquid, ointment,
and pressurized spray forms. However, the pleasant-tasting
and quick-acting liquid, gel, or ointment preparations
seem to be preferred by most dentists. These agents are applied to the oral mucous membranes with a cotton-tipped
applicator. Numerous anesthetic agents have been used in
topical anesthetic preparations, including ethyl aminobenzoate, butacaine sulfate, cocaine, dyclonine, lidocaine, and
tetracaine.
Ethyl aminobenzoate (benzocaine) liquid, ointment, or
gel preparations are probably best suited for topical anesthesia in dentistry. They offer a more rapid onset and longer duration of anesthesia than other topical agents. They
are not known to produce systemic toxicity as oral topical anesthetics, but a few localized allergic reactions have
been reported from prolonged or repeated use. Examples
of commercially available products are Hurricaine (Beutlich L.P. Pharmaceuticals, Inc., Chicago, Illinois, United
States), Topicale (Premier Dental Products, Inc., Plymouth
Meeting, Pennsylvania, United States), and Gingicaine
(Gingi-Pak, Inc., Camarillo, California, United States). All
three products are available in gel form. Gingicaine is also
available in liquid and spray forms, Hurricaine as a liquid,
and Topicale in ointment and patch forms. All products
are supplied in a variety of flavors.
The mucosa at the site of the intended needle insertion
is dried with gauze, and a small amount of the topical anesthetic agent is applied to the tissue with a cotton swab.
Topical anesthesia should be produced in approximately
30 seconds.
During the application of the topical anesthetic, the dentist should prepare the child for the injection. The explanation should not necessarily be a detailed description but
simply an indication that the tooth is going to be put to
sleep so that the treatment can proceed without discomfort.

JET INJECTION
The jet injection instrument is based on the principle
that small quantities of liquids forced through very small
openings under high pressure can penetrate mucous
membrane or skin without causing excessive tissue trauma. One jet injection device, the Syrijet Mark II (Keystone
Industries, Cherry Hill, New Jersey, United States), holds
a standard 1.8-mL cartridge of local anesthetic solution. It
can be adjusted to expel 0.05 to 0.2 mL of solution under
2000 psi pressure.
Jet injection produces surface anesthesia instantly and
is used instead of topical anesthetics by some dentists. The
method is quick and essentially painless, although the
abruptness of the injection may produce momentary anxiety in the patient. This technique is also useful for obtaining gingival anesthesia before a rubber dam clamp is placed
for isolation procedures that otherwise do not require local anesthetic. Similarly, soft-tissue anesthesia may be obtained before band adaptation of partially erupted molars

Local Anesthesia and Pain Control for the Child and Adolescent

275

or for the removal of a very loose (soft-tissue–retained) primary tooth. O’Toole has reported that the Syrijet may be
used instead of needle injections for nasopalatine, anterior
palatine, and long buccal nerve blocks.2
A more recently developed jet injection device, reported by Duckworth and colleagues, delivers a dose of dry
powdered anesthetic to the oral mucosa.3 In this study—
an initial trial with 14 adult participants—successful topical analgesia without tissue damage was reported. More
clinical trials are required before substantial claims can
be made regarding the efficacious of this technique and
whether its routine use for topical anesthesia is warranted.

LOCAL ANESTHESIA BY CONVENTIONAL
INJECTION
Wittrock and Fischer4 and later Trapp and Davies5 demonstrated that human blood can be readily aspirated with
the smaller-gauge needles. Trapp and Davies reported positive aspiration through 23-, 25-, 27-, and 30-gauge needles
without a clinically significant difference in resistance to
flow. Malamed recommends the use of larger-gauge needles (i.e., 25 gauge) for injection into highly vascular areas
or areas where needle deflection through soft tissue may
be a factor.6 Regardless of the size of the needle used, it
is generally agreed that the anesthetic solution should be
injected slowly, and that the dentist should watch the patient closely for any evidence of an unexpected reaction.
The injections that are most commonly used in the treatment of children are described in the following sections.

ANESTHETIZATION OF MANDIBULAR
TEETH AND SOFT TISSUE
INFERIOR ALVEOLAR NERVE BLOCK
(CONVENTIONAL MANDIBULAR BLOCK)
In general, when deep operative or surgical procedures
are undertaken for the mandibular primary or permanent
teeth, the inferior alveolar nerve must be blocked. The supraperiosteal injection technique may sometimes be useful
in anesthetizing primary incisors, but it is not as reliable
for complete anesthesia of the mandibular primary or permanent molars.
Olsen reported that the mandibular foramen is situated at a level lower than the occlusal plane of the p
­ rimary
teeth of the pediatric patient.7 Therefore the injection
must be made slightly lower and more posteriorly than
for an adult patient. An accepted technique is one in
which the thumb is laid on the occlusal surface of the
molar, with the tip of the thumb resting on the internal
oblique ridge and the ball of the thumb resting in the
retromolar fossa. Firm support during the injection procedure can be given when the ball of the middle finger is
resting on the posterior border of the mandible. The barrel of the syringe should be directed on a plane between
the two primary molars on the opposite side of the arch.
It is advisable to inject a small amount of the solution as
soon as the tissue is penetrated and to continue to inject
minute quantities as the needle is directed toward the
mandibular foramen.

276

Chapter 15

n

Local Anesthesia and Pain Control for the Child and Adolescent

The depth of insertion averages about 15 mm but varies
with the size of the mandible and its changing p
­ roportions,
depending on the age of the patient. Approximately 1 mL
of the solution should be deposited around the inferior
alveolar nerve (Figs. 15-1 and 15-2).

LINGUAL NERVE BLOCK
One can block the lingual nerve by bringing the syringe
to the opposite side with the injection of a small quantity of the solution as the needle is withdrawn. If small
amounts of anesthetic are injected during insertion and
withdrawal of the needle for the inferior alveolar nerve
block, the lingual nerve will invariably be anesthetized
as well.

LONG BUCCAL NERVE BLOCK
For the removal of mandibular permanent molars or
sometimes for the placement of a rubber dam clamp on
these teeth, it is necessary to anesthetize the long buccal
nerve. A small quantity of the solution may be deposited
in the mucobuccal fold at a point distal and buccal to the
indicated tooth (Fig. 15-3).

Figure 15-1 The mandible is supported by the thumb and

middle finger, while the needle is directed toward the inferior alveolar nerve.

Figure 15-2 Anesthetic solution is deposited around the

inferior alveolar nerve.

All facial mandibular gingival tissue on the side that
has been injected will be anesthetized for operative procedures, with the possible exception of the tissue facial to
the central and lateral incisors, which may receive innervation from overlapping nerve fibers from the opposite
side.

INFILTRATION ANESTHESIA FOR MANDIBULAR
PRIMARY MOLARS
To test the hypothesis that dental pain control by infiltration/intrapapillary injection was less effective than
inferior alveolar block/long buccal infiltration anesthesia in children, Naidu and colleagues8 conducted
a two-group, randomized, blinded, controlled design
study comparing two local anesthesia techniques using 2% lidocaine, 1:100,000 epinephrine. They studied
101 healthy children, aged 5 to 8 years, who had no
contraindication for local anesthetic and who needed
a pulpotomy treatment and stainless steel crown placement in a mandibular primary molar. All children were
given 40% nitrous oxide. Children self-reported pain
using the Color Analogue Scale (from 1, indicating “no
pain,” to 10, indicating “most pain”). The overall pain
levels reported by the children were low, and there
were no differences between conditions at any point
in the procedure. Mean self-reported pain reports for
clamp placement were 2.8 for block/long buccal and
1.9 for infiltration/intrapapillary (p = 0.1). Pain reports
for drilling were 2.0 for block/long buccal and 1.8 for
infiltration/intrapapillary (p = 0.7). Supplementary local anesthetic was required by 9% of the children (4 of
52) in the block/long buccal group and by 10.2% (5 of
49) of those in the infiltration/intrapapillary group (p =
0.07). There was no difference in pain control effectiveness between infiltration/intrapapillary injection and
inferior alveolar block/long buccal infiltration by 2%
lidocaine with 1:100,000 epinephrine when mandibular primary molars received pulpotomy treatment and
stainless steel crowns.
Oulis and associates9 reported similar results when
comparing the effectiveness of mandibular infiltration
anesthesia with that of mandibular block anesthesia

Figure 15-3 In anesthetization of the long buccal nerve, a

small quantity of the solution may be deposited in the mucobuccal fold adjacent to the first permanent molar.

Chapter 15

n

in children 3 to 9 years of age requiring the same type
of treatment on contralateral mandibular molars. The
half-mouth study design was used. Dental procedures
included class I and II amalgam restorations, stainless
steel crowns, formocresol pulpotomies, and extractions.
Evaluations of pain and behavior for each anesthetic
technique and type of treatment were made based on
sounds, motor, and ocular changes indicating pain and
on the Frankl behavior rating scale. Evaluations were
made upon probing, rubber dam placement, and during
tooth preparation and extraction. Study results reported
that no statistically significant difference was found between the two anesthetic techniques for either behavior
pain during amalgam or stainless steel crown restorations
(p = 0.05). Mandibular infiltration was less effective than
mandibular block for pulpotomy and extraction (p =
0.05). No significant relationship between effectiveness
and age, as determined by primary or mixed dentition,
was noticed.
In 1976 a new local anesthetic, articaine, was introduced in Europe, and by 1983 it was in use in Canada.
It was not available in the United States until 2000, by
which time the preservative had been removed from
the formulation, and it received Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approval. Articaine (Septocaine), manufactured by Septodont (http://www.septodontusa.com),
­underwent several research studies to test its reliability
and effectiveness, and it became readily available and
widely used. Articaine is unique among local anesthetics because it contains a thiophene group and both ester
and amide groups. Articaine is an amide anesthetic (it has
an amide intermediate chain) that is metabolized in the
liver. The associated ester group also allows for plasma
metabolism via pseudocholinesterase, which purportedly
increases the rate of breakdown and reduces toxicity. This
difference in metabolism gives articaine the advantage of
having a 30-minute half-life; lidocaine, for example, has
a 90-minute half-life.10-14
Sharaf15 demonstrated that behavior in young children can be adversely affected by the painful mandibular block. It is well known that articaine has a high
bone-penetrating ability, which suggests that it may be
more successful as a locally injected infiltration. From
these reports, one may infer that mandibular infiltration
anesthesia may produce adequate anesthesia in mandibular deciduous molars for most restorative procedures
(Video 15-1: Local anesthetic techniques 1 and 2).

Local Anesthesia and Pain Control for the Child and Adolescent

277

may be adequate. Incisor infiltration is most useful as an
adjunct to an inferior alveolar nerve block when total
anesthesia of the quadrant is desired. In this case the
infiltration injection is made close to the midline on the
side of the block anesthesia, but the solution is deposited labial to the incisors on the opposite side of the
midline.

MANDIBULAR CONDUCTION ANESTHESIA
(GOW-GATES MANDIBULAR BLOCK TECHNIQUE)
In 1973 Gow-Gates introduced a new method of achieving mandibular anesthesia, which he referred to as
mandibular conduction anesthesia.16 This approach uses
­external anatomic landmarks to align the needle so that
anesthetic solution is deposited at the base of the neck of
the mandibular condyle. This technique is a nerve block
procedure that anesthetizes virtually the entire distribution of the fifth cranial nerve in the mandibular area,
including the inferior alveolar, lingual, buccal, mental,
incisive, auriculotemporal, and mylohyoid nerves. Thus
with a single injection, the entire right or left half of the
mandibular teeth and soft tissues can be anesthetized,
except possibly the mandibular incisors, which may
receive partial innervation from the incisive nerves of
the opposite side. Gow-Gates suggested that, once the
technique is learned properly, it rarely fails to produce
good mandibular anesthesia.16 He used the technique in
practice more than 50,000 times. The technique has become increasingly popular and is often referred to as the
Gow-Gates technique.
The external landmarks to help align the needle for
this injection are the tragus of the ear and the corner of
the mouth. The needle is inserted just medial to the tendon of the temporal muscle and considerably superior to
the insertion point for conventional mandibular block
anesthesia. The needle is also inclined upward and parallel to a line from the corner of the patient’s mouth to the
lower border of the tragus (intertragic notch). The needle
and the barrel of the syringe should be directed toward
the injection site from the corner of the mouth on the
opposite side (Fig. 15-4).

INFILTRATION FOR MANDIBULAR INCISORS
The terminal ends of the inferior alveolar nerves cross
over the mandibular midline slightly and provide conjoined innervation of the mandibular incisors. A single
inferior alveolar nerve block may not be adequate for
operative or surgical procedures on the incisors, even
on the side of the block anesthesia. The labial cortical
bone overlying the mandibular incisors is usually thin
enough for supraperiosteal anesthesia techniques to be
effective.
If only superficial caries excavation of mandibular incisors is needed or if the removal of a partially exfoliated
primary incisor is planned, infiltration anesthesia alone

Figure 15-4 Barrel of the syringe is aligned with a line from

the corner of the mouth to the intertragic notch.

278

Chapter 15

n

Local Anesthesia and Pain Control for the Child and Adolescent

ANESTHETIZATION OF MAXILLARY
PRIMARY AND PERMANENT INCISORS
AND CANINES
SUPRAPERIOSTEAL TECHNIQUE (LOCAL
INFILTRATION)
Local infiltration (supraperiosteal technique) is used
to anesthetize the primary anterior teeth. The injection should be made closer to the gingival margin than
in the patient with permanent teeth, and the solution
should be deposited close to the bone. After the needle
tip has penetrated the soft tissue at the mucobuccal
fold, it needs little advancement before the solution
is deposited (2 mm at most) because the apices of the
maxillary primary anterior teeth are essentially at the
level of the mucobuccal fold. Some dentists prefer to
pull the upper lip down over the needle tip to penetrate
the tissue rather than advancing the needle upward.
This approach works quite well for the maxillary anterior region (Figs. 15-5 to 15-7).
In the anesthetization of the permanent central incisor teeth, the puncture site is at the mucobuccal fold so
that the solution may be deposited slowly and slightly
above and close to the apex of the tooth. Because nerve
fibers may be extending from the opposite side, it may
be necessary to deposit a small amount of the anesthetic
solution adjacent to the apex of the other central incisor
to obtain adequate anesthesia in either primary or permanent teeth. If a rubber dam is to be applied, it is advisable to inject a drop or two of anesthetic solution into
the lingual free marginal tissue to prevent the discomfort
associated with the placement of the rubber dam clamp
and ligatures.

Before extraction of the incisors or canines in either
the primary or permanent dentition, it is necessary for
the palatal soft tissues to be anesthetized. The nasopalatine injection provides adequate anesthesia for the palatal
tissues of all four incisors and at least partial anesthesia of
the canine areas. Nerve fibers from the greater (anterior)
palatine nerve usually extend to the canine area as well.
If only a single anterior tooth is to be removed, adequate
palatal anesthesia may also be obtained when anesthetic
solution is deposited in the attached palatal gingiva adjacent to the tooth to be removed. If it is observed that
the patient does not have profound anesthesia of anterior
teeth during the operative procedures with the supraperiosteal technique, a nasopalatine injection is advisable.

ANESTHETIZATION OF MAXILLARY
PRIMARY MOLARS AND PREMOLARS
Traditionally, dentists have been taught that the middle
superior alveolar nerve supplies the maxillary primary
molars, the premolars, and the mesiobuccal root of the
first permanent molar. There is no doubt that the middle
superior alveolar nerve is at least partially responsible for

Figure 15-6 Needle point is opposite the apex of the maxil-

lary primary incisor.

Figure 15-5 Anesthetization of a central incisor. The

supraperiosteal injection should be close to the bone and
adjacent to the apex of the tooth.

Figure 15-7 Position of the needle for anesthetization of a

maxillary primary canine.

Chapter 15

n

the innervation of these teeth. However, Jorgensen and
Hayden, during child cadaver dissections, have demonstrated plexus formation of the middle and posterior superior alveolar nerves in the primary molar area.17 The
role of the posterior superior alveolar nerve in innervating the primary molar area has not previously received
adequate attention. In addition, Jorgensen and Hayden
have demonstrated maxillary bone thickness approaching 1 cm overlying the buccal roots of the first permanent
and second primary molars in the skulls of children.17
The bone overlying the first primary molar is thin,
and this tooth can be adequately anesthetized by injection of anesthetic solution opposite the apices of
the roots (Figs. 15-8 and 15-9). However, the thick zygomatic process overlies the buccal roots of the second
primary and first permanent molars in the primary and
early-mixed dentition. This thickness of bone renders
the supraperiosteal injection at the apices of the roots
of the second primary molar much less effective; the
injection should be supplemented with a second injection superior to the maxillary tuberosity area to block
the posterior superior alveolar nerve, as has been traditionally taught for permanent molars (Fig. 15-10). This
supplemental injection helps compensate for the additional bone thickness and the posterior middle superior
alveolar nerve plexus in the area of the second primary
molar, which compromise the anesthesia obtained by
injection at the apices only.
For anesthetization of the maxillary first or second premolar, a single injection is made at the mucobuccal fold
to allow the solution to be deposited slightly above the
apex of the tooth. Because of the horizontal and vertical
growth of the maxilla that has occurred by the time the
premolars erupt, the buccal cortical bone overlying their
roots is thin enough to permit good anesthesia with this
method. The injection should be made slowly, and the
solution should be deposited close to the bone; these recommendations hold true for all supraperiosteal and block
anesthesia techniques in dentistry.
Before operative procedures for maxillary primary
molars and maxillary premolars are undertaken, the appropriate injection techniques for the buccal tissues, as

Figure 15-8 Injection of the anesthetic solution to anes-

thetize the maxillary second primary molar for operative
procedures.

Local Anesthesia and Pain Control for the Child and Adolescent

279

described, should be performed. If the rubber dam clamp
impinges on the palatal tissue, injection of a drop or two
of the anesthetic solution into the free marginal tissue
lingual to the clamped tooth alleviates the discomfort
and is less painful than the true greater (anterior) palatine
injection. The greater palatine injection is indicated if
maxillary primary molars or premolars are to be extracted
or if palatal tissue surgery is planned.

ANESTHETIZATION OF MAXILLARY
PERMANENT MOLARS
To anesthetize the maxillary first or second permanent
molars, the dentist instructs the child to partially close
the mouth to allow the cheek and lips to be stretched
laterally. The tip of the dentist’s left forefinger (for a righthanded dentist) will rest in a concavity in the mucobuccal
fold and is rotated to allow the fingernail to be adjacent
to the mucosa. The ball of the finger is in contact with
the posterior surface of the zygomatic process. Bennett
suggests that the finger be on a plane at right angles to
the occlusal surfaces of the maxillary teeth and at 45°
to the patient’s sagittal plane.18 The index finger should
point in the direction of the needle during the injection.

Figure 15-9 Anesthetic solution is injected opposite the

apices of the buccal roots of the first primary molar.

Figure 15-10 Posterior superior alveolar injection for maxil-

lary permanent molars and second primary molar.

280

Chapter 15

n

Local Anesthesia and Pain Control for the Child and Adolescent

The puncture point is in the mucobuccal fold above and
distal to the distobuccal root of the first permanent molar. If the second molar has erupted, the injection should
be made above the second molar. The needle is advanced
upward and distally, depositing the solution over the apices of the teeth. The needle is inserted for a distance of
approximately 2 cm in a posterior and upward direction;
it should be positioned close to the bone, with the bevel
toward the bone (see Fig. 15-10).
For complete anesthesia of the first permanent molar
for operative procedures, the supraperiosteal injection is
made by insertion of the needle in the mucobuccal fold
and deposition of the solution at the apex of the mesiobuccal root of the molar.

ANESTHETIZATION OF THE PALATAL
TISSUES
Anesthesia of the palatal tissues can be one of the more
exquisitely painful procedures performed in dentistry.
Ramirez and colleagues discuss methods for achieving
profound anesthesia with minimal pain in the palatal and
lingual aspects.19 After buccal infiltration they suggest interdental (interpapillary) infiltration, with slow injection
of the anesthetic solution as the needle is penetrating the
papilla. The interdental infiltration allows for diffusion of
the anesthetic to the palatal aspect via the craterlike area
of the interproximal oral mucosa joining the lingual and
buccal interdental papillae, known as the col. Blanching
of the area indicates sufficient anesthesia of the superficial soft tissues; however, additional palatal infiltration
may be given as needed.

Figure 15-11 The needle is directed upward into the incisive

canal when the nasopalatine nerve is anesthetized.

NASOPALATINE NERVE BLOCK
Blocking the nasopalatine nerve anesthetizes the palatal
tissues of the six anterior teeth. If the needle is carried
into the canal, it is possible to anesthetize the six anterior teeth completely. However, this technique is painful
and is not routinely used before operative procedures. If
the patient experiences incomplete anesthesia after supraperiosteal injection above the apices of the anterior
teeth on the labial side, it may be necessary to resort to
the nasopalatine injection. The path of insertion of the
needle is alongside the incisive papilla, just posterior to
the central incisors. The needle is directed upward into
the incisive canal (Fig. 15-11). The discomfort associated
with the injection can be reduced by deposition of the
anesthetic solution in advance of the needle. When anesthesia of the canine area is required, it may be necessary
to inject a small amount of anesthetic solution into the
gingival tissue adjacent to the lingual aspect of the canine
to anesthetize overlapping branches of the greater palatine nerve.

GREATER (ANTERIOR) PALATINE INJECTION
The greater palatine injection anesthetizes the mucoperiosteum of the palate from the tuberosity to the canine
region and from the median line to the gingival crest on
the injected side. This injection is used with the middle or
posterior alveolar nerve block before surgical procedures.
The innervation of the soft tissues of the posterior two

Figure 15-12 Greater palatine injection is used in conjunc-

tion with the middle or posterior alveolar nerve block before
removal of a maxillary primary molar.

thirds of the palate is derived from the greater and lesser
palatine nerves.
Before the injection is made, it is helpful to bisect an
imaginary line drawn from the gingival border of the
most posterior molar that has erupted to the midline.
Approaching from the opposite side of the mouth, the
dentist makes the injection along this imaginary line
and distal to the last tooth (Figs. 15-12 and 15-13).
In the child in whom only the primary dentition has
erupted, the injection should be made approximately
10 mm posterior to the distal surface of the second
primary molar. It is not necessary to enter the greater
palatine foramen. A few drops of the solution should
be injected slowly at the point where the nerve emerges
from the foramen.

Chapter 15

n

Local Anesthesia and Pain Control for the Child and Adolescent

281

Refer to the textbook by Malamed for more detailed information concerning the infraorbital block, the mental
block, and other local anesthetic techniques.6

PERIODONTAL LIGAMENT INJECTION
(INTRALIGAMENTARY INJECTION)

Figure 15-13 The needle is inserted approximately 10 mm

posterior to the distal surface of the second primary molar.

SUPPLEMENTAL INJECTION TECHNIQUES
INFRAORBITAL NERVE BLOCK AND MENTAL
NERVE BLOCK
The infraorbital nerve block and mental nerve block are
two additional local anesthetic techniques used by many
dentists. The infraorbital nerve block anesthetizes the
branches of the anterior and middle superior alveolar
nerves. It also affects innervation of the soft tissues below
the eye, half of the nose, and the oral musculature of the
upper lip on the injected side of the face. This leaves the
child with a feeling of numbness above the mouth similar
to that below the mouth when an inferior alveolar nerve
is blocked. In addition, there is temporary partial oral
paralysis. These effects do not contraindicate use of the
technique when it is truly needed. However, its use can be
difficult to justify in routine operative and extraction procedures for teeth innervated by the anterior and middle
superior alveolar nerves because the supraperiosteal techniques are more localized and just as effective. The infraorbital block technique is preferred when impacted teeth
(especially canines or first premolars) or large cysts are to
be removed, when moderate inflammation or infection
contraindicates use of the supraperiosteal injection site,
or when longer duration or a greater area of anesthesia is
needed.
The mental nerve block leaves the patient with essentially the same feelings of numbness as the inferior
alveolar nerve block. Blocking the mental nerve anesthetizes all mandibular teeth in the quadrant except
the permanent molars. Thus the mental nerve block
makes it possible for routine operative procedures to be
performed on all primary teeth without discomfort to
the patient. However, the inferior alveolar nerve block
should be favored unless there is a specific contraindication to its use at the inferior alveolar nerve injection site.
The mental nerve block is no more comfortable for the
patient, and the technique puts the syringe in clear view
of the patient, whereas the inferior alveolar nerve block
may be performed with the syringe out of the child’s
direct vision.

The periodontal ligament injection has been used for many
years as an adjunctive method of obtaining more complete
anesthesia when supraperiosteal or block techniques failed
to provide adequate anesthesia. This technique has also
gained credibility as a good method of obtaining primary
anesthesia for one or two teeth.
The technique is simple, requires only small quantities
of anesthetic solution, and produces anesthesia almost instantly. The needle is placed in the gingival sulcus, usually
on the mesial surface, and is advanced along the root surface until resistance is met. Approximately 0.2 mL of anesthetic is then deposited into the periodontal ligament.
For multirooted teeth, injections are made both mesially
and distally. Considerable pressure is necessary to express
the anesthetic solution.
A conventional dental syringe may be used for this
technique. However, the great pressure required to express the anesthetic makes it desirable to use a syringe
with a closed barrel, to offer protection in the unlikely
event that the anesthetic cartridge breaks. Some syringes
are equipped with a metal or Teflon sleeve that encloses
the cartridge and provides the necessary protection in
case of breakage.
Syringes designed specifically for the periodontal ligament injection technique have been developed. One
syringe, the Peri-Press (Universal Dental Implements,
Fanwood, New Jersey, United States), is designed with a
lever-action “trigger” that enables the dentist to deliver
the necessary injection pressure conveniently. The PeriPress syringe has a solid metal barrel and is calibrated to
deliver 0.14 mL of anesthetic solution each time the trigger is completely activated.
There are some possible psychological disadvantages
to the use of the periodontal ligament injection technique, especially for the inexperienced pediatric patient.
The technique provides the patient with an opportunity
to see the syringe and to watch the administration of
the anesthetic. This may not be a significant problem for
the experienced, well-adjusted dental patient, but it may
contribute to the anxiety reaction of the new or anxietyprone patient. In addition, the very design of the PeriPress (which resembles a handgun) probably has some
adverse psychological effects.
There are two types of syringes designed specifically for
intraligamentary injections: gun-like and pen-like. They
both have the additional disadvantage of being quite
expensive compared with good, conventional aspirating
syringes. The pen-like syringe would be preferred in pediatric dentistry, but it is even more expensive than the gunlike instrument. Nevertheless, the periodontal ligament
injection technique seems to offer a valuable adjunctive
method of achieving dental anesthesia.
Malamed has reported a clinical study in which impressive results were obtained for certain procedures when
the periodontal ligament injection technique was used.20

282

Chapter 15

n

Local Anesthesia and Pain Control for the Child and Adolescent

The sample size was small for some procedures, and he
pointed out that additional research was warranted. However, seven periodontal procedures (curettage and root
planing) were performed with 100% effective anesthesia,
and two teeth were extracted with 100% effective anesthesia (injections were administered to the mesial, distal,
buccal, and lingual areas for these procedures). Seventyone routine restorative procedures were performed under periodontal ligament anesthesia, with 91.5% effectiveness. Because of the confined space and the limited
blood circulation at the injection site for the periodontal
ligament technique, the use of vasoconstrictors as an additive to the anesthetic solution may not be warranted.
In fact, vasoconstrictors might conceivably contribute
to ischemia of the periodontal ligament, which could at
least add to localized postoperative discomfort or possibly
cause more serious damage to the periodontal ligament.
Walton and Abbott have also reported a clinical evaluation of the technique that showed a 92% success rate.21
The periodontal ligament injection offers the following
advantages for either primary or adjunctive anesthesia:
  
1.	It provides reliable pain control rapidly and easily.
2.	It provides pulpal anesthesia for 30 to 45 minutes,
long enough for many single-tooth procedures without an extended period of postoperative anesthesia.
3.	It is no more uncomfortable than other local anesthesia techniques.
4.	It is completely painless if used adjunctively.
5.	It requires very small quantities of anesthetic solution.
6.	It does not require aspiration before injection.
7.	It may be performed without removal of the rubber
dam.
8.	It may be useful in patients with bleeding disorders
that contraindicate use of other injections.
9.	It may be useful in young or disabled patients in
whom the possibility of postoperative trauma to the
lips or tongue is a concern.

INTRAOSSEOUS INJECTION, INTERSEPTAL
INJECTION, AND INTRAPULPAL INJECTION
Intraosseous, interseptal, and intrapulpal injection techniques have been known for many years. The intrapulpal
injection is an adjunctive anesthesia technique designed
to obtain profound pulpal anesthesia during direct pulp
therapy when other local anesthesia attempts have failed.
The intrapulpal injection often provides the desired anesthesia, but the technique has the disadvantage of being
initially painful, although the onset of anesthesia is usually rapid.
Intraosseous injection techniques (of which the interseptal injection is one type) require the deposition
of local anesthetic solution in the porous alveolar bone.
One may do this by forcing a needle through the cortical
plate and into the cancellous alveolar bone, or a small,
round bur may be used to create access in the bone for
the needle. A small, reinforced intraosseous needle may
be used to penetrate the cortical plate more easily. This
procedure is not particularly difficult in children because
their cortical bone is less dense than that of adults. The
intraosseous techniques have been advocated for both

primary ­anesthesia and adjunctive anesthesia when other
local injections have failed to produce adequate anesthesia. These techniques have been reported by Lilienthal to
produce profound anesthesia.22 They do not seem to offer
any advantages over the periodontal ligament injection
except when use of the latter is contraindicated by infection in the periodontal ligament space.

COMPUTER-CONTROLLED LOCAL ANESTHETIC
DELIVERY SYSTEM (WAND)
Reports by Friedman and Hochman23 and by Krochak
and Friedman24 emphasize the advantages of a computer-controlled local anesthetic delivery system known as
the Wand (Milestone Scientific, Livingston, New Jersey,
United States). The system includes a conventional local anesthetic needle and a disposable wand-like syringe
held by a pen grasp when used for oral local anesthetic
injections. A microprocessor with a foot control regulates
the delivery of anesthetic solution through the syringe
at a precision-metered flow rate, constant pressure, and
controlled volume. The system includes an aspiration
cycle for use when necessary. Block, infiltration, palatal, and periodontal ligament injections are all reported
to be more comfortable for the patient with the Wand
than with conventional injection techniques. In a randomized clinical trial comparing the Wand with the traditional anesthetic delivery system, Allen and associates
demonstrated that use of the Wand led to significantly
fewer disruptive behaviors (p < 0.01) in preschool-aged
children.25 None of the preschool-aged children exposed
to the Wand required restraint during the initial interval,
whereas nearly half of the children receiving a traditional
injection required some type of immediate restraint.

COMPLICATIONS AFTER A LOCAL
ANESTHETIC
ANESTHETIC TOXICITY
Systemic toxic reactions from anesthetics are rarely observed in adults. However, young children are more
likely to experience toxic reactions because of their lower
body weight. Young children are also often sedated with
pharmacologic agents before the treatment. The potential for toxic reactions increases when local anesthetics
are used in conjunction with sedation medications. Aubuchon found a direct linear relationship between the
number of cartridges of local anesthetic administered
and the frequency of severe reactions.26 It is most important for dentists who treat children to be acutely aware
of the maximum recommended dosages of the anesthetic
agents they use because allowable dosages are based on
the patient’s weight (Table 15-1). For example, the toxic
dose of lidocaine would be attained if hardly more than
1.5 cartridges (3 mL) of 2% lidocaine with 1:100,000 epinephrine were injected at one time in a patient weighing
14 kg (30 lb). Yet 5.5 cartridges of the same anesthetic
agent would be required to reach the toxic level in an
adolescent patient weighing 46 kg (100 lb).
Another simple alternative for calculating maximum
safe doses of local anesthetics is offered by Moore and

Chapter 15

n

Local Anesthesia and Pain Control for the Child and Adolescent

283

Table 15-1
Maximum Recommended Doses of Local Anesthetics
Dose

Proprietary
Name

Percent of Local
Anesthetic

Lidocaine

Xylocaine

2

Mepivacaine

Carbocaine

3

Prilocaine

Citanest
Forte
Septocaine

4

Epinephrine 1:200,000

4

Epinephrine 1:100,000

Articaine

Vasoconstrictor

Duration of Anesthetic

Epinephrine 1:100,000

Pulpal: 60 min
Soft tissue: 3-5 h
Pulpal: 20-40 min
Soft tissue: 2-3 h
Pulpal: 60-90 min
Soft tissue: 3-8 h
Pulpal: 60-75 min
Soft tissue: 180-360 min

Maximum
Recommended Dose

4.4 mg/kg
4.4 mg/kg
6.0 mg/kg
7 mg/kg

Adapted from Malamed SF: Handbook of local anesthesia, ed 6, St. Louis, 2012, Elsevier.

Hersh,27 who suggest that it is the most conservative
guideline that can be applied to all anesthetic formulations used in dentistry. “The rule of 25” states that for
healthy patients, a dentist can safely use 1 cartridge of
anesthetic for every 25 pounds of patient weight; that is,
1 cartridge for a patient weighing 25 pounds, 2 cartridges
for a patient weighing 50 pounds, 3 cartridges for a patient weighing 75 pounds, and 6 cartridges for a patient
weighing 150 pounds or greater.
Because there is the possibility of toxic reaction to
­local anesthetic in some children, Wilson and colleagues
have studied and reported on the clinical effectiveness
of 1% and 2% lidocaine.28 They found that 1% and 2%
lidocaine were equally effective for minor procedures on
primary molars.27 The 1% lidocaine had a slightly lower
effectiveness for major procedures, including pulpotomies and extractions.

TRAUMA TO SOFT TISSUE
Parents of children who receive regional local anesthesia
in the dental office should be warned that the soft tissue
in the area will be without sensation for 1 hour or more.
These children should be observed carefully so that they
will not purposely or inadvertently bite the tissue. Children who receive an inferior alveolar injection for routine
operative procedures may bite the lip, tongue, or inner
surface of the cheek. Sometimes a parent calls the dentist’s
office an hour or two after a dental appointment to report
an injury to the child’s oral mucous membrane. The parent may wonder if the accident occurred during the dental appointment; in all probability the child has chewed
the area, and the result 24 hours later is an ulceration, often termed a traumatic ulcer (Fig. 15-14). Complications
after a self-inflicted injury of this type are rare. However,
the child should be seen in 24 hours, and a warm saline
mouthrinse is helpful in keeping the area clean.
In a prospective study, College and colleagues evaluated unilateral vs. bilateral mandibular nerve block anesthesia with regard to postoperative soft-tissue trauma and
other complications in a pediatric population.29 Their
results showed that after unilateral and bilateral blocks,
13% of patients experienced postoperative soft-tissue
trauma, with the younger patients (younger than 4 years
of age) experiencing more than twice as many problems

Figure 15-14 Child who has chewed his lip after an inferior

alveolar nerve block for operative procedures.

as the older patients (older than 12 years of age). Interestingly the study showed that, in the group younger than
age 4, patients receiving the unilateral nerve blocks had a
significantly higher incidence of trauma than patients receiving the bilateral nerve blocks (35% vs. 5%). Although
the use of bilateral mandibular nerve blocks has been discouraged in the past, College and colleagues concluded
that there is no contraindication to the use of bilateral
mandibular block anesthesia in pediatric patients.

REVERSAL OF DENTAL ANESTHESIA
With the granting of marketing approval by the FDA in
May 2008, OraVerse (Septodont, Inc., Louisville, Colorado, United States, www.septodont.com; Novalar Pharmaceuticals, Inc., San Diego, California, United States,
http://www.novalar.com) (phentolamine mesylate) became the first pharmaceutical agent indicated for the reversal of soft-tissue anesthesia—that is, anesthesia of the
lip and tongue, and the associated functional deficits resulting from an intraoral submucosal injection of a local
anesthetic containing a vasoconstrictor.
In randomized, double-blind, controlled phase 3 studies, following the administration of local anesthetics
and completion of the dental procedure, patients were
given either OraVerse or the control treatment. OraVerse

284

Chapter 15

n

Local Anesthesia and Pain Control for the Child and Adolescent

Table 15-2
Common Medications and Dosages for Oral Pediatric Postoperative Pain Management
Medication

Availability

Dosage

Acetaminophen

Elixir: 160 mg/5 mL
Tablets: 325 mg
Chewable: 160 mg
Suspension: 100 mg/5 mL
Tablets: 200, 300, 400, 600, 800 mg
Tablets: 50, 100 mg

10-15 mg/kg/dose given at 4-to 6-hour
intervals

Ibuprofen
Tramadol
Codeine and
­acetaminophen
Hydrocodone and
acetaminophen

Suspension: 12 mg/5 mL
12 mg codeine/120 mg acetaminophen/5 mL
Suspension: 7.5 mg hydrocodone/325 mg
acetaminophen/15 mL
Tablets: 5 mg hydrocodone/325 mg acetaminophen

4-10 mg/kg/dose given at 6- to 8-hour
intervals
1-2 mg/kg/dose given at 4- to 6-hour
intervals – maximum 100 mg
0.5-1.0 mg/kg/dose given at
4- to 6-hour intervals
0.3 mL/kg/dose given at 4- to 6-hour
intervals
<50 kg 0.135 mg/kg

Partially adapted from Tate AR, Acs G: Dental postoperative pain management in children, Dent Clin North Am 46:707-717, 2002.

reduced the median time to recovery of normal sensation
in the lower lip (as measured by standardized lip-tapping
procedures) by 85 minutes compared with the control.
OraVerse reduced the median time to recovery of normal
sensation in the upper lip by 83 minutes. Within 1 hour
after administration of OraVerse, 41% of the patients reported normal lower lip sensation, compared with 7% in
the control group, and 59% of patients in the OraVerse
group reported normal upper lip sensation, compared
with 12% in the control group. Similar results in additional pediatric patients (from 6 to 11 years of age) have
been recently reported.30
In all OraVerse clinical trials, no serious adverse events
were reported. The most common adverse reaction was
transient injection site pain. Although tachycardia and
cardiac arrhythmia may occur with the parenteral use of
alpha-adrenergic blocking agents, such events are uncommon after the submucosal administration of OraVerse.
Currently, OraVerse is not recommended for use in children younger than 6 years of age or in those who weigh
less than 15 kg (33 lb). Clinical trials are being conducted
in the U.S. for children from 2 to 5 years of age. These trials are being conducted under the FDA’s Pediatric Research
Equity Act (http://www.fda.gov/drugs/developmentappro
valprocess/developmentresources/ucm049867.htm).

ANALGESICS
In addition to local administration of anesthetics, systemic administration of analgesics is occasionally necessary to help control pain. These analgesics may be
needed in instances of moderate to severe pain associated with trauma or infectious processes such as abscessed
teeth, or they may be administered preoperatively or
postoperatively in association with a dental procedure
that may cause pain for the child. The rationale for the
preoperative administration of analgesics draws on the
theory that giving the drug before the procedure provides effective analgesia because it precedes the inflammatory response and subsequent pain incurred during
the operative procedure. This theory is not without

controversy, however, and there are conflicting reports
within the literature as to the efficacy of this technique.
Tate and Acs suggest that the selection and dosages of
analgesics vary because of the changes in body weight
and composition that occur throughout childhood.31
The first choice in most cases is the least potent analgesic
with the fewest side effects. Table 15-2 provides common
pediatric pain management agents and their appropriate
dosage schedules. Rarely does the recommended dosage
of acetaminophen or nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory
drugs fail to control the dental pain, and in such cases,
the combination of codeine and acetaminophen provides
the needed pain relief. Finally, in cases of severe pain in
which codeine and acetaminophen are not effective, hydrocodone and acetaminophen may be indicated.

REFERENCES
1.	Venham L, Quatrocelli S: The young child’s response to repeated dental procedures, J Dent Res 56:734–738, 1977.
2.	O’Toole TJ: Administration of local anesthesia. In Snawder
KD, editor: Handbook of clinical pedodontics, St. Louis, 1980,
Mosby.
3.	Duckworth GM et al.: Oral PowderJect: a novel system for
administering local anaesthesia to the oral mucosa, Br Dent J
185:536–539, 1998.
4.	Wittrock JW, Fischer WE: The aspiration of blood through
small-gauge needles, J Am Dent Assoc 76:79–81, 1968.
5.	Trapp LD, Davies RO: Aspiration as a function of hypodermic needle internal diameter in the in vivo human upper
limb, Anesth Prog 27:49–51, 1980.
6.	Malamed SF: Handbook of local anesthesia, ed 6, St. Louis,
2012, Elsevier Mosby.
7.	Olsen NH: Anesthesia for the child patient, J Am Dent Assoc
53:548–555, 1956.
8.	Naidu S et al.: A randomized controlled trial comparing
mandibular local anesthesia techniques in children receiving
nitrous oxide-oxygen sedation, Anesth Prog 51:19–23, 2004.
9.	Oulis CJ, Vadiakas GP, Vasilopoulou A: The effectiveness of
mandibular infiltration compared to mandibular block anesthesia in treating primary molars in children, Pediatr Dent
18:301–305, 1996.
10.	Oertel R, Rahn R, Kirch W: Clinical pharmacokinetics of articaine, Clin Pharmacokinet 33(6):417–426, 1997.

Chapter 15

n

11.	Ortel R et al.: The concentration of local anesthetics in the
dental alveolus, comparative studies of lidocaine and articaine in the mandible and maxilla, Schweiz Monatsschr Zahnmed 104(8):952–955, 1994.
12.	Vree TB, Gielen MJ: Clinical pharmacology and the use of
articaine for local regional anaesthesia, Best Pract Res Clin Anaesthesiol 19(2):293–308, 2005.
13.	Claffey E et al.: Anesthetic efficacy of articaine for inferior
alveolar nerve blocks in patients with irreversible pulpitis,
J Endodont 30(8):568–571, 2004.
14.	Kanaa MD et al.: Articaine and lidocaine mandibular buccal infiltration anesthesia: a prospective randomized double
blind cross-over study, J Endodont 32(4):296–298, 2006.
15.	Sharaf AA: Evaluation of mandibular infiltration versus block
anesthesia in pediatric dentistry, J Dent Child 64:276–281,
1997.
16.	Gow-Gates GAE: Mandibular conduction anesthesia: a new
technique using extraoral landmarks, Oral Surg 36:321–328,
1973.
17.	Jorgensen NB, Hayden J Jr: Sedation, local and general anesthesia in dentistry, ed 3, Philadelphia, 1980, Lea & Febiger.
18.	Bennett CR: Monheim’s local anesthesia and pain control in dental practice, ed 7, St. Louis, 1984, Mosby.
19.	Ramirez K et al.: Painless pediatric local anesthesia, Gen Dent
49(2):174–176, 2001.
20.	Malamed SF: The periodontal ligament (PDL) injection: an alternative to inferior alveolar nerve block, Oral Surg 53:117–121,
1982.
21.	Walton RE, Abbott BJ: Periodontal ligament injection: a clinical evaluation, J Am Dent Assoc 103:571–575, 1981.
22.	Lilienthal B: A clinical appraisal of intraosseous dental anesthesia, Oral Surg 39:692–697, 1975.

Local Anesthesia and Pain Control for the Child and Adolescent

285

23.	Friedman MJ, Hochman MN: A 21st century computerized
injection system for local pain control, Compend Contin Educ
Dent 18:995–1000, 1002–1004, 1997.
24.	Krochak M, Friedman N: Using a precision-metered injection
system to minimize dental injection anxiety, Compend Contin Educ Dent 19:137–143, 146–150, 1998.
25.	Allen KD et al.: Comparison of a computerized anesthesia
device with a traditional syringe in preschool children, Pediatr Dent 24(4):315–320, 2002.
26.	Aubuchon RW: Sedation liabilities in pedodontics, Pediatr
Dent 4:171–180, 1982.
27.	Moore PA, Hersh EV: Local anesthetics: pharmacology and
toxicology, Dent Clin North Am 54:587–599, 2010.
28.	Wilson TG et al.: Clinical effectiveness of 1 and 2% lidocaine
in young pediatric dental patients, Pediatr Dent 12:353–359,
1990.
29.	College C et al.: Bilateral versus unilateral mandibular block
anesthesia in a pediatric population, Pediatr Dent 22(6):
453–457, 2000.
30.	Tavares M et al.: Reversal of soft-tissue local anesthesia with
phentolamine mesylate in pediatric patients, J Am Dent Assoc
139:1095–1104, 2008.
31.	Tate AR, Acs G: Dental postoperative pain management in
children, Dent Clin North Am 46(4):707–117, 2002.

SUGGESTED READINGS
Berde CB, Sethna NF: Drug therapy: analgesics for the treatment
of pain in children, N Engl J Med 347(14):1094–1103, 2002.
Blanton PL, Jeske AH: The key to profound local anesthesia:
neuroanatomy, J Am Dent Assoc 134:753–760, 2003.

CHAPTER

16

Nonpharmacologic Management
of Children’s Behaviors
s Jenny I. Stigers

For additional resources, please visit the

website.

CHAPTER OUTLINE
PEDIATRIC DENTAL PATIENTS
Variables Influencing Children’s
Dental Behaviors
Classifying Children’s Cooperative
Behavior
The Functional Inquiry

T

PARENTS OF PEDIATRIC PATIENTS
STRATEGIES OF THE DENTAL TEAM
Preappointment Behavior
Modification
Fundamentals of Behavior Guidance
Communicating with Children

he foundation of practicing dentistry for children
is the ability to guide them through their dental
experiences. In the short term, this ability is a prerequisite to providing for their immediate dental needs.
More long-lasting beneficial effects also can result when
the seeds for future dental health are planted early in life.
For many years the process of leading a child through a
dental appointment had been termed behavior management. In 2003 the American Academy of Pediatric Dentistry (AAPD) sponsored a national symposium on behavior
management that focused on clinical techniques and the
changing environment of and trends in contemporary
pediatric dental practices. Following this conference,
AAPD introduced the term behavior guidance in its clinical
guidelines to emphasize that the goals are not to “deal
with” a child’s behavior but rather to enhance communication and partner with the child and parent to promote
a positive attitude and good oral health. Wright and Kupietzky recently reported that behavior management continues
to be the preferred term globally.1
A professional goal is to promote positive dental attitudes and improve the dental health of society. Logically,
children are keys to the future. A major difference between
the treatment of children and the treatment of adults is
the relationship. Treating adults generally involves a oneto-one relationship, that is, a dentist-patient relationship.
Treating a child, however, usually relies on a one-to-two
relationship among the dentist, the patient, and parents
or caregivers. Figure 16-1 illustrates this relationship,
known as the pediatric dentistry treatment triangle.1 Because
these individuals and their relationships cannot be segregated from external influences, the triangle is encircled by
society. Management methods acceptable to society and
the litigiousness of society have been factors influencing
treatment modalities. Juntgen et al. found that obstacles
to incorporating previously unused techniques into pediatric dental practices include legal concerns, parental

286

Behavior Shaping
Retraining
Aversive Conditioning
Practical Considerations
Limitations

acceptance to change, and limited resources.2 Note that
the child is at the apex of the triangle and is the focus of
attention of both the family and the dental team. Although
mothers’ attitudes have been shown to significantly affect
their children’s behaviors in the dental office, the roles
of families have been changing, and the entire family
environment must be considered. Because changes are
constantly occurring within each personality, one must
remember that there is an ever-changing, dynamic relationship among the corners of the triangle—the child, the
family, and the dental team. The arrows placed on the
lines of communication remind us that communication
is reciprocal.
The importance of this unifying concept will become
evident as behavior guidance techniques are described.
However, this concept also serves as the basis of organization for this chapter, the goal of which is to discuss nonpharmacologic approaches to guiding children’s behavior
in dentistry.

PEDIATRIC DENTAL PATIENTS
Child development involves the study of all areas of human
development from conception through young adulthood.
It involves more than physical growth, which often implies
only an increase in size. Development implies a sequential
unfolding that may involve changes in size, shape, function, structure, or skill.
Over the years, numerous child development theories
have evolved. These have helped explain physical, cognitive, language, motor, and social/emotional development.
Recently fields such as behavior genetics and social epigenetics
have focused on the influences of both nature and nurture
on health outcomes. Considerable development occurs
in utero and during the early years of life. Boyce reported
that being reared in poverty or disadvantaged settings affects brain development both structurally and functionally.3

Chapter 16

n

Nonpharmacologic Management of Children’s Behaviors

287

Box 16-1
Child

Age-Related Psychosocial Traits and Skills
for 2- to 5-Year-Old Children
TWO YEARS

Parent/caregiver

Dentist/dental team

Figure 16-1 The pediatric treatment triangle illustrates

basic relationships in pediatric dentistry. (Modified from
Wright GZ, Kupietzky A. Introductory remarks. In Wright GZ,
Kupietzky A, eds. Behavior management in dentistry for
children, 2nd ed, 2014, Wiley Blackwell, 3-9.)

Geared to gross motor skills, such as running and
jumping
Likes to see and touch
Very attached to parent
Plays alone; rarely shares
Has limited vocabulary; shows early sentence formation
Becoming interested in self-help skills
THREE YEARS

Less egocentric; likes to please
Has very active imagination; likes stories
Remains closely attached to parent
FOUR YEARS

He described a neurobiologic susceptibility to social contexts that can jeopardize development. The convergence
of social-environmental conditions and genetically derived
differences in vulnerability is a rapidly expanding area of
research, one that is important to oral health care for children. Although there may be expectations for children’s
skills based upon chronological age, the practitioner must
assess the individual child’s understanding and be familiar
with the family environment. Differences in genetics, personality, and experience influence the way the child engages
with his surroundings. If influences are in harmony, healthy
development of the child can be expected; if they are dissonant, behavioral problems are almost sure to ensue. Key to
a practitioner’s interaction with a child is remembering that
each child is unique and exists in the context of his family.
Early child development study linked changes to specific chronologic ages. The initial work gathered age norms
for physiologic developmental tasks. Eventually, personality description principles also evolved. One of the pioneering and most notable groups, headed by Arnold Gesell,
was at Yale University. Typical personality characteristics
related to specific chronologic ages that have relevance to
dentistry are listed in Box 16-1.4 These can help in the development of behavioral guidance strategies. For example,
if the dentist knows the limitations of a 2-year-old’s
vocabulary, it becomes apparent that communication
must occur through the sense of touch and voice modulation rather than through the spoken word. Recognizing
also the close symbiotic relationship with parents, dentists
generally try to keep the parent-child pair intact.
Relating personality characteristics to chronologic ages
has led to some interesting labeling. For example, a noncompliant 2-year-old is often referred to as being in the
stage of the “terrible twos.” Dentists sometimes refer to
such children as being in the precooperative stage. Unfortunately, this has led, in some instances, to use of the age
of the child, rather than the child’s ability, as a reason for
noncompliance.
The broad area of physical development involves
changes that occur in children’s size, strength, motor
coordination, functioning of body systems, and so forth.
Thus the child’s total physical growth and efficiency from

Tries to impose powers
Participates in small social groups
Reaches out—expansive period
Shows many independent self-help skills
Knows “thank you” and “please”
FIVE YEARS

Undergoes a period of consolidation; deliberate
Takes pride in possessions
Relinquishes comfort objects, such as a blanket
or thumb
Plays cooperatively with peers
(Based on the work of Dr. A. Gesell.4)

the moment of conception until adulthood are together
termed physical development. Because a child’s physical development is relatively independent of other major areas
of development, subareas of physical development must
be relatively independent. Neither can a child’s coordination be judged by physical size nor is physical strength
related to dental development.
Relating key aspects of development to chronologic
ages has led to the establishment of developmental milestones as a means of assessing individual children. Selected
developmental, cognitive, and psychosocial milestones
are listed in Table 16-1. There is a normal range of ages at
which motor and language skills are acquired; a general
principle is that the earlier a skill emerges, the narrower is
the range. On the other hand, developmental tasks tend
to occur with wider ranges of normality as age increases.
For the dentist, this holds practical importance. For example, consider the task of teaching children how to floss
their teeth. Because the ability to floss occurs later in life
(9 to 12 years of age), there is a wide performance range.
Knowing the general developmental principle reminds
the clinician to consider the ability or readiness of the
individual to perform a given task.
Another area that has received great attention from
psychologists is the socialization of children. As with
physical development, age-specific skills have been derived

288

Chapter 16

n

Nonpharmacologic Management of Children’s Behaviors

Table 16-1
Developmental, Cognitive, and Psychosocial Stages of Children
Movement/Physical
­Development

Age

Social/Emotional

Language/Communication

Cognitive

6 Months

•	Knows familiar
faces and begins to
know if someone is
a stranger
•	Likes to play with
­others, especially
parents
•	Responds to other
people’s emotions
and often seems
happy
•	Likes to look at self
in a mirror

•	Looks around at
things nearby
•	Brings things to
mouth
•	Shows curiosity
about things and
tries to get things
that are out of reach
•	Begins to pass things
from one hand to
the other

•	Rolls over in both
directions (front to
back, back to front)
•	Begins to sit without support
•	When standing,
supports weight
on legs and might
bounce
•	Rocks back and
forth, sometimes
crawling backward
before moving
forward

12 Months

•	Is shy or nervous
with strangers
•	Cries when mom or
dad leaves
•	Has favorite things
and people
•	Shows fear in some
situations
•	Hands you a book
when he wants to
hear a story
•	Repeats sounds
or actions to get
attention
•	Puts out arm or leg
to help with dressing
•	Plays games such as
“peek-a-boo” and
“pat-a-cake”

•	Responds to sounds
by making sounds
•	Strings vowels
together when babbling (“ah,” “eh,”
“oh”) and likes taking
turns with parent
while making sounds
•	Responds to own
name
•	Makes sounds to show
joy and displeasure
•	Begins to say consonant sounds (jabbering with “m,” “b”)
•	Responds to simple
spoken requests
•	Uses simple gestures,
like shaking head
“no” or waving
“bye-bye”
•	Makes sounds with
changes in tone
(sounds more like
speech)
•	Says “mama” and
“dada” and exclamations like “uh-oh!”
•	Tries to say words
you say

•	Explores things in
different ways, like
shaking, banging,
throwing
•	Finds hidden things
easily
•	Looks at the right
picture or thing
when it’s named
•	Copies gestures
•	Starts to use things
correctly; for example, drinks from a
cup, brushes hair
•	Bangs two things
together
•	Puts things in a container, takes things
out of a container
•	Lets things go without help
•	Pokes with index
(pointer) finger
•	Follows simple
directions like “pick
up the toy”

•	Gets to a sitting
position without
help
•	Pulls up to stand,
walks holding
on to furniture
(“cruising”)
•	May take a few
steps without holding on
•	May stand alone

Chapter 16

n

289

Nonpharmacologic Management of Children’s Behaviors

Table 16-1
Developmental, Cognitive, and Psychosocial Stages of Children—cont’d
Movement/Physical
­Development

Age

Social/Emotional

Language/Communication

Cognitive

24 Months

•	Copies others,
especially adults and
older children
•	Gets excited when
with other children
•	Shows more and
more independence
•	Shows defiant behavior (doing what he
has been told not to)
•	Plays mainly beside
other children, but is
beginning to include
other children, such
as in chase games

•	Points to things or
pictures when they
are named
•	Knows names of
familiar people and
body parts
•	Says sentences with
2 to 4 words
•	Follows simple
instructions
•	Repeats words
overheard in
conversation
•	Points to things in a
book

•	Finds things even
when hidden under
two or three covers
•	Begins to sort
shapes and colors
•	Completes sentences and rhymes
in familiar books
•	Plays simple makebelieve games
•	Builds towers of 4 or
more blocks
•	Might use one hand
more than the other
•	Follows two-step
instructions such as
“Pick up your shoes
and put them in the
closet.”
•	Names items in a
picture book such as
a cat, bird, or dog

•	Stands on tiptoe
•	Kicks a ball
•	Begins to run
•	Climbs onto and
down from furniture without help
•	Walks up and
down stairs holding on
•	Throws ball
overhand
•	Makes or copies
straight lines and
circles

36 Months

•	Copies adults and
friends
•	Shows affection
for friends without
prompting
•	Takes turns in games
•	Shows concern for a
crying friend
•	Understands the idea
of “mine” and “his”
or “hers”
•	Shows a wide range
of emotions
•	Separates easily from
mom and dad
•	May get upset with
major changes in
routine
•	Dresses and
undresses self

•	Follows instructions
with 2 or 3 steps
•	Can name most
familiar things
•	Understands words
like “in,” “on,” and
“under”
•	Says first name, age,
and sex
•	Names a friend
•	Says words like “I,”
“me,” “we,” and
“you” and some plurals (cars, dogs, cats)
•	Talks well enough
for strangers to
understand most of
the time
•	Carries on a conversation using 2 to 3
sentences

•	Can work toys with
buttons, levers, and
moving parts
•	Plays make-believe
with dolls, animals,
and people
•	Does puzzles with 3
or 4 pieces
•	Understands what
“two” means
•	Copies a circle with
pencil or crayon
•	Turns book pages
one at a time
•	Builds towers of
more than 6 blocks
•	Screws and unscrews
jar lids or turns door
handle

•	Climbs well
•	Runs easily
•	Pedals a tricycle
(3-wheel bike)
•	Walks up and
down stairs, one
foot on each step

Continued

290

Chapter 16

n

Nonpharmacologic Management of Children’s Behaviors

Table 16-1
Developmental, Cognitive, and Psychosocial Stages of Children—cont’d
Age

Social/Emotional

Language/Communication

Cognitive

48 Months

•	Enjoys doing new
things
•	Plays “Mom” and
“Dad”
•	Is more and more
creative with makebelieve play
•	Would rather play
with other children
than by himself
•	Cooperates with
other children
•	Often can’t tell
what’s real and
what’s make-believe
•	Talks about what she
likes and what she is
interested in

•	Knows some basic
rules of grammar,
such as correctly
using “he” and “she”
•	Sings a song or says a
poem from memory
such as “Itsy Bitsy
Spider” or “Wheels
on the Bus”
•	Tells stories
•	Can say first and last
name

•	Names some colors
and some numbers
•	Understands the
idea of counting
•	Starts to understand
time
•	Remembers parts of
a story
•	Understands the
idea of “same” and
“different”
•	Draws a person with
2 to 4 body parts
•	Uses scissors
•	Starts to copy some
capital letters
•	Plays board or card
games
•	Tells you what he
thinks is going to
happen next in a
book

60 Months

•	Wants to please friends •	Speaks very clearly
•	Wants to be like friends •	Tells a simple story
•	More likely to agree
using full sentences
with rules
•	Uses future tense; for
•	Likes to sing, dance,
example, “Grandma
will be here.”
and act
•	Is aware of gender
•	Says name and address
•	Can tell what’s real and
what’s make-believe
•	Shows more independence (for example,
may visit a next-door
neighbor by himself
[adult supervision is
still needed])
•	Is sometimes demanding and sometimes very
cooperative

Movement/Physical
­Development

•	Hops and stands
on one foot up to 2
seconds
•	Catches a bounced
ball most of the
time
•	Pours, cuts with
supervision, and
mashes own food

•	Counts 10 or more
•	Stands on one foot for
things
10 seconds or longer
•	Can draw a person
•	Hops; may be able to
with at least 6 body
skip
parts
•	Can do a somersault
•	Can print some letters •	Uses a fork and spoon
or numbers
and sometimes a table
knife
•	Copies a triangle and
other geometric shapes •	Can use the toilet on
•	Knows about things
her own
used every day, like
•	Swings and climbs
money and food

(Adapted from Centers for Diseases Control and Prevention (CDC) http://www.cdc.gov/ncbddd/actearly/pdf/checklists/all_checklists.pdf
Data from Shelov S. and Altman TR: Caring for your baby and young child: birth to age 5, 5th edition, 2009 by the American Academy of
­Pediatrics; and Hagan J. Shaw JS, and Duncan PM: Bright futures: guidelines for health supervision of infants, children, and adolescents, 3rd
­edition, Elk Grove Village, IL: 2008, American Academy of Pediatrics. This milestone checklist is not a substitute for a standardized, validated
developmental screening tool.)

Chapter 16

for social development; these take into account both interpersonal relationships and independent functioning
skills. An important process for dentists is the child’s
growth toward independent functioning. For their survival, infants are dependent on others to clothe, feed, and
nurture them. As children grow and their ability to care
for themselves improves, they gain social independence.
Recognizing that the change from functional dependency
to functional autonomy is a normal process in social development can assist the dentist. Many young children
want to brush their own teeth but lack sufficient digital
dexterity. Parents, on the other hand, understand the lack
of digital skills and often insist on attending to their children’s oral health care. Appreciating that this tug-of-war
is a normal part of social maturation allows the dentist to
intercede and make appropriate conciliatory recommendations.
Intellectual development is probably the area most
comprehensively studied, beginning in the early 1900s
with the work of Alfred Binet.5 The method that he employed quantified mental abilities in relation to chronologic age. It led to the concept of the intelligence quotient
(IQ), which was measured by tasks examining memory,
spatial relationships, reasoning, and a variety of other
primary mental skills. By determining the average age
required to pass each task, he derived age norms. This
enabled an examiner to determine a child’s mental age
based on performance.
Quantification of intelligence has led to various classification guides. Since the time of Binet, more than 300
tests have been devised to measure intellectual development. The best-known and most frequently used of these
tests are the Wechsler intelligence scales. These are individualized as opposed to group tests, and separate forms
of the test are available for preschoolers (Wechsler Preschool and Primary Scale of Intelligence, or WPPSI), children (Wechsler Intelligence Scale for Children-Revised, or
WISC-R), and adults (Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale,
or WAIS).
Intellectual functioning is measured by assessment
with one or more standardized, individually administered
intelligence tests such as the Wechsler Intelligence Scales
for Children or the Revised Stanford-Binet. Generally, an
IQ test has a median raw score of 100 and a standard deviation of 15. Performance classifications such as “very
superior” or “borderline” have been used over the years;
other terms such as “upper extreme” and “lower extreme”
have been suggested to reflect deviations from the norm
while being more value-neutral.
Those with an IQ test score of around 70 (approximately two standard deviations below the mean) may
have a limitation in intellectual functioning. However,
intellectual disability would not be diagnosed in an individual with an IQ of less than 70 without significant
limitations in adaptive functioning in areas such as
communication, self-care, social/interpersonal skills, and
adaptation to home living. A measure of adaptive functioning is obtained from a developmental and medical history
and one or more reliable collateral sources (e.g., caregiver,
educator). Scales have been designed to quantify adaptive functioning, such as the Vineland Adaptive Behavior

n

Nonpharmacologic Management of Children’s Behaviors

291

Scales, whose measures provide a composite score reflective of subscores in several adaptive skill domains.
Scores from tests, even the highly standardized ones,
are only estimates and may not be a fair appraisal for a
given child on a given day. The younger the child, the less
reliable the test scores. The more delayed the child, the
less reliable the test scores. The more an individual’s cultural and educational opportunities differ from the norm,
the less reliable and valid that test is for that individual.
However, the information from psychometric assessments
can alert a dentist to the possibility that a child may need
an individualized approach in the dental office, as well as
elsewhere. Individuals with intelligence deficiency or intellectual disability may require special behavior guidance.

VARIABLES INFLUENCING CHILDREN’S DENTAL
BEHAVIORS
The responses of children to the dental environment
are diverse and complex. Children present for treatment
with differences in age, maturity, temperament, experience, family background, culture, and oral health status.
Klingberg and Broberg,6 in a review of literature from
1982 to 2006, reported that dental fear/anxiety and
dental behavior management problems were relatively
common for pediatric dental patients, each affecting 9%
of children and adolescents. Girls exhibited more dental anxiety and dental behavior management problems
than did boys. Dental fear/anxiety was more closely associated with temperamental traits such as shyness, inhibition, and negative emotionality, whereas behavioral
problems were connected with activity and impulsivity.
Blomqvist et al. found a significant correlation between
dental fear and anxiety and verbal IQ, but not any other
cognitive index, in a population of children with behavior and learning problems.7
Most dentists readily recognize children with dental
behavior management problems, whereas dental fear and
anxiety may be more subtle. Fear is best understood in the
context of personal, environmental, and situational influences. It can be a normal reaction for young children,
especially in unfamiliar situations where they lack control
or perceive the potential for pain. As children age, with
increasing ability to anticipate, understand, and control
impulses, fears may be expected to decline. But if fear or
anxiety is disproportionate to the situation, an unpleasant experience is likely and the child may become uncooperative and display disruptive behavior.
Dental fear/anxiety is not synonymous with dental behavior management problems. In a study of more than
3200 Swedish children, Klingberg and Berggren8 found
that 27% of patients with dental behavior management
problems showed dental fear/anxiety, whereas 61% of
those with fear/anxiety reacted with behavioral problems.
The key to successful outcomes (i.e., compliance, relief
of anxiety, completion of quality care, development of a
trusting relationship) is an appropriate assessment of the
child and family to prepare them to participate actively in
a positive manner in the child’s oral health care. Dentistry
has had some difficulty identifying the stimuli that lead
to misbehavior in the dental office, although several variables in children’s backgrounds have been related to it.

292

Chapter 16

n

Nonpharmacologic Management of Children’s Behaviors

Parental Anxiety
With few exceptions, investigations indicate a significant
correlation between maternal anxiety and a child’s cooperative behavior at the first dental visit. High anxiety on
the part of parents tends to affect their children’s behavior
negatively. Parents can and do convey their fears to their
children. Although analysis of the scientific data reveals
that children of all ages can be affected by their mothers’
anxieties, the effect is greatest with those younger than
four years of age. This might be anticipated because of the
child-parent symbiosis that begins in infancy and gradually diminishes.

Toxic Stress
Stress is first experienced in utero and will recur throughout life. Although stress produces some minor physiologic
changes, it is normal and necessary for survival. Many
stresses, such as receiving immunizations and beginning
daycare, are short-lived. Parents offer support to young
children experiencing these stressors, but children ultimately must learn how to cope with challenges they encounter. Stress that continues over a prolonged period and
has lifelong effects is termed toxic stress. Toxic stressors
include child abuse/neglect, chronic exposure to drugs or
violence in the home, and parental depression or mental
illness. Economic hardship is a stressor experienced recently by many families. Long summarized the influence
of economic hardship on children and parents.9 Parental
support, discipline, and caregiving suffer. The child, in
turn, may develop behavioral and emotional adjustment
problems.

Medical Experiences
The importance of medical experiences, a highly complex
variable, has been debated over the years. There is general agreement, however, that children who view medical
experiences positively are more likely to be cooperative
with the dentist. The emotional quality of past visits rather than the number of visits is significant. The behavior
of children with special health care needs may differ from
that of healthy children. Those with chronic medical conditions (without developmental delay) can become “adultified.”10 Because of recurring medical experiences, they
may become accustomed to the health care setting and
behave “better” than expected.
Pain during previous health care visits is another consideration in a child’s medical experiences. The pain
may have been moderate or intense, real or imaginary.
Nonetheless, parental beliefs about past medical pain are
significantly correlated with their children’s cooperative
behavior in the dental environment. Studies have also
shown that previous surgical experiences adversely influence behavior at the first dental visit, but this was not the
case in subsequent visits.

Awareness of Dental Problem
Some children may approach their dentist knowing that
they have a dental problem. The problem may be as serious as a chronic dental abscess or as simple as extrinsic
staining of the dentition. However, there is a tendency
toward negative behavior at the first dental visit when

the child believes that a dental problem exists. Concern
about the presence of caries may also lead to missed appointments. Such considerations provide the dentist with
greater motivation for educating the parents about the
value of establishing a dental home early—before any
dental problems develop. Early, regular dental visits decrease a child’s risk of preventable oral disease, help a
child develop appropriate coping mechanisms, and enhance a positive attitude for future visits.

General Behavior Problems

Klingberg and Broberg6 found some support for a relationship between general behavioral problems and dental behavior management problems. Children who have
difficulty focusing attention and/or adjusting activities
in their general environment have increased problems
complying with behavioral expectations in the dental environment. General fears can be important etiologic factors in the development of dental fears. Some children,
however, have behavioral problems only in the dental
environment; this may be due to previous negative experiences with dental care.

CLASSIFYING CHILDREN’S COOPERATIVE
BEHAVIOR
Numerous systems have been developed for classifying
children’s behavior in the dental environment. An understanding of these systems holds more than academic
interest. Such knowledge can be an asset to the dentist in
several ways: assisting in directing the behavior guidance
approach, providing a means for the systematic recording
of behaviors, and assisting in evaluating the validity of
current research.
Wright’s clinical classification places children in one of
three categories11:
  
•	Cooperative
•	Lacking in cooperative ability
•	Potentially cooperative
  
When a child is being examined, his/her cooperative
behavior is taken into account because it is a key to the
rendering of treatment. Most children seen in the dental
office cooperate. Cooperative children are reasonably relaxed. They have minimal apprehension and may even
be enthusiastic. They can be treated by a straightforward,
behavior-shaping approach. When guidelines for behavior are established, these children perform within the
framework provided.
In contrast is the child lacking in cooperative ability.
This category includes very young children with whom
communication cannot be established and of whom
comprehension cannot be expected. Because of their age,
they lack cooperative abilities. Another group of children
who lack cooperative ability is those with specific debilitating or disabling conditions. The severity of the child’s
condition prohibits cooperation in the usual manner. At
times, special behavior guidance techniques are used for
these children. Although their treatment can be carried
out, immediate major positive behavioral changes cannot
be expected. Characteristically the nomenclature applied
to a potentially cooperative child is “behavior problem.”
This type of behavior differs from that of children lacking

Chapter 16

cooperative ability because these children have the capability to perform cooperatively. This is an important
distinction. When a child is characterized as potentially
cooperative, clinical judgment is that the child’s behavior can be modified; that is, the child can become cooperative.
The dental literature is filled with descriptions of potentially cooperative patients. Moreover, the adverse reactions have been given specific labels, such as uncontrolled,
defiant, timid, tense-cooperative, and whining. Dentists
often use these labels because they convey, in as few words
as possible, the essence of the child’s response to the dental care.
Another system that has been used in behavioral science research is the Frankl behavior rating scale.12 A description of the scale, which divides observed behavior
into
  four categories, follows:
•	Rating 1: Definitely negative. Refusal of treatment,
forceful crying, fearfulness, or any other overt evidence of extreme negativism
•	Rating 2: Negative. Reluctance to accept treatment, uncooperativeness, some evidence of negative attitude
but not pronounced (sullen, withdrawn)
•	Rating 3: Positive. Acceptance of treatment; cautious
behavior at times; willingness to comply with the
dentist, at times with reservation, but patient follows
the dentist’s directions cooperatively
•	Rating 4: Definitely positive. Good rapport with the
dentist, interest in the dental procedures, laughter
and enjoyment
  
The Frankl method of classification has been a popular
research tool, and it also lends itself to a shorthand form
that can be used for recording children’s behavior in the
dental office: positive cooperative behavior can be jotted
down as “+” or “+ +” and uncooperative behavior as “−”
or “− −.” A shortcoming of this method is that the scale
does not communicate sufficient clinical information
regarding uncooperative children. If a child is judged as
“−,” the user of this classification system must qualify and
categorize the reaction. If “−, tearful” is recorded, a better
description of the clinical response is made.

THE FUNCTIONAL INQUIRY
Before the dentist treats a child, medical, dental, and social histories are essential. However, a functional inquiry,
from a behavioral viewpoint, should also be conducted.
During the inquiry, there are two primary goals: (1) to
learn about patient and parental concerns and (2) to gather information to enable a reliable estimate of the cooperative ability of the child. Coupling the findings from
the functional inquiry with the clinical experience, the
dentist is in a much better position to meet the patient’s
needs and to apply appropriate behavior guidance strategies to treat individual pediatric patients than by simply
proceeding inadequately informed.
Usually, functional inquiries are conducted in two
ways: (1) by a paper-and-pencil questionnaire completed by the parent and (2) by direct interview of child and
parent. In some offices, one method may predominate,
whereas in others both techniques are used. Each method
has specific merits.

n

Nonpharmacologic Management of Children’s Behaviors

293

Box 16-2
Clinically Relevant Questions That Can Be
Added to History Forms
(CIRCLE ONE)

How do you think your
child has reacted to past
medical procedures?

Very well
Moderately well
Moderately poorly
Very poorly
How would you rate your High
own anxiety (fear, nervous- Moderately high
ness) at this moment?
Moderately low
Low
Does your child think there Yes
No
is anything wrong with
his or her teeth, such as a
chipped tooth, decayed
tooth, or gum boil?
How do you expect your
Very well
child to react in the dental Moderately well
chair?
Moderately poorly
Very poorly

Written questionnaires can be important tools for gaining information because probing questions can uncover
critical facts about child-rearing practices in the home, a
child’s school experiences, or the patient’s developmental
status. Four questions with clinical relevance that can be
added to history forms are listed in Box 16-2.
The responses to these questions, originally from behavioral science research, can alert the clinician to a potential behavioral problem. If a parent responds negatively
to more than one question, the chance of encountering
a behavior problem rises considerably. An unlimited list
of questions could be prepared for paper-and-pencil questionnaires, but from the dentist’s viewpoint, a lengthy list
is impractical.
Most practicing dentists recognize the merits of personal contact with parents. For the personal interview to
serve as an efficient functional inquiry tool, a structured
framework is necessary. The paper-and-pencil questionnaire is a starting point. It provides general information
or clues that help guide the personal interview. Consider
the following question:
Do you consider your child to be (check one):
  
___ advanced in learning?
___ progressing normally?
___ a slow learner?
  
If the parent has indicated that the child is a slow
learner, more factual information is necessary. A leading question in the personal interview might be, “Does
your child receive special services at school?” A child may
receive support services through an individualized education progam or attend a special classroom or school.
Knowledge of the child’s educational plan or special academic environment can offer a clue about the functional
level of the patient. There is no limit to the depth of the
personal interview, but if it is to be efficient, questioning

294

Chapter 16

n

Nonpharmacologic Management of Children’s Behaviors

must be thoughtful. Other avenues that can be explored
include rewards and consequences used in the home environment. These provide insight into the type of behavior guidance techniques that would be acceptable to a
parent.

PARENTS OF PEDIATRIC PATIENTS
From the moment of their children’s birth, parents shape
children’s behaviors by selective encouragement and discouragement of particular behaviors, by their disciplinary
techniques, or lack thereof, and by the amount of freedom
they allow. In early years, at least historically, it is mainly
from parents that children learn what they are supposed
to do and what behavior is forbidden. Single-parent families, blended families, families with same-sex parents, and
multigenerational households all have their special sets
of circumstances. Furthermore, societal changes in recent
years have created dynamics that can indirectly affect
the behavior of children in dental offices. For example,
when children are brought to dental offices by caregivers or child care workers unfamiliar with the children’s
histories, and to whom the children have little attachment, insecurity may interfere with the child’s ability to
communicate effectively with the dentist. When providing dental care for children, it is important that dentists
understand parents’ expectancies. In dentist-parent relationships, a difficult question is, “What does a parent
or caregiver consider an acceptable behavioral guidance
technique?” Considering societal changes and that North
America is a cultural mosaic with many parents having
dental attitudes deeply rooted in their heritage, it is not
an easy question to answer. Because some ethnic minorities rely on family elders in health care decision-making,
it may be wise to ask whether anyone besides the presenting parent should be included in treatment planning
discussions.13
Despite the acknowledged importance of the parental
role in the pediatric treatment triangle and the necessity
of gaining parental cooperation, it is only recently that
the dental literature has provided dentists with advice for
collaborating with parents. When the parent is confused
and the confusion goes unrecognized by the dentist, compliance with health behaviors suffers. Bidirectional communication is critical. Three notable works on parental
acceptance are by Murphy and colleagues,14 Lawrence
and associates,15 and Eaton and co-workers.16 The three
studies are similar in design: Parents are shown videotapes
of different behavioral guidance methods and instructed
to indicate their acceptability of them on a rating scale.
The studies span two decades, provide interesting information, and show how parental attitudes change. In the
earliest study,14 10 techniques were videotaped. Four of
the techniques found to be acceptable were tell-show-do,
positive reinforcement, voice control, and use of a mouth
prop. Six techniques found to be unacceptable involved
restraint methods, sedation, and general anesthesia.
The latter two studies15,16 used the same videotape
and demonstrated eight behavior guidance methods. All
studies reported tell-show-do as the most acceptable technique. In the latter two studies, nitrous oxide sedation was

found to be the next most acceptable technique. All studies were able to establish a hierarchy of parental acceptance based upon the mean ratings of parent responses,
allowing for the observation of two interesting changes.
Hand-over-mouth became the least accepted technique,
whereas general anesthesia became the third most accepted method for behavior guidance.
Caution must be exercised when the results of these investigations are applied to clinical practice. Eaton16 noted
considerable variability in parental attitudes to all techniques. The studies also require replication with the same
videotapes in different locales. Do New England parents,
Spanish-speaking parents in Florida or New Mexico, Native American parents, and West Coast parents all hold
the same views as do parents in the American Midwest,
where these studies were performed?
There is not complete agreement as to what formulates
parental attitudes. Eaton and colleagues16 found that
parental gender, age, and social status were unrelated to
attitudes. However, an earlier study by Fields and coworkers17 showed that social status correlated negatively
with general anesthesia. Those parents in the higher
socioeconomic group frowned on general anesthesia.
Again, this illustrates how things have changed over two
decades, in that the Eaton study showed much greater
acceptance of general anesthesia.
Casamassimo et al. surveyed diplomates of the American Board of Pediatric Dentistry regarding parenting
styles and the impact on dental practice.18 Most diplomates indicated that there has been a change in parental
demographics. There are more single parents, increased
mobility, and more dual-income families. The findings
from this report determined that children’s behaviors in
dental offices were strongly related to parenting styles,
preferences, and demands. Failure of parents to set limits on their children’s behaviors was the main parental
child-rearing problem. The investigators also found that
parental expectations were often unattainable.
Dentists in practice must anticipate these types of
problems and learn to contend with them. The diplomates suggested several methods of coping with parent’s
and children’s behaviors; however, one recommendation dwarfed all others in frequency—the improvement
of communication. Communication can mean many
things, but in this instance it refers to the dentist’s getting his or her message across to the parents and having
them work with the dentist. All messages should be communicated in a manner that is respectful of the family’s
values, beliefs, and behaviors. Building rapport is critical
in gaining both parental and patient cooperation and
compliance. Motivational interviewing is one technique
for the assessment of parental beliefs and underlying social determinants that can be effective in altering health
behaviors.19

STRATEGIES OF THE DENTAL TEAM
A primary objective during dental procedures is to lead
children step by step so that they develop a positive attitude toward dentistry. Fortunately, most children
progress easily and pleasantly through their dental visits,

Chapter 16

without undue pressure on themselves or the dental
team. These successes can be attributed to several factors,
such as a child’s confident personality, a parent’s proper
preparation of the child for the appointment, or a dental
team’s excellent communicative skills. In contrast, some
children’s dental office experiences cause anxiety and the
beginning of a negative dental attitude. Sometimes these
controllable but apprehensive children are managed
without medication, as long as appropriate nonpharmacologic psychologic techniques are used.
Because behavior guidance techniques are used daily
and come naturally to many persons, their importance
sometimes is overlooked or taken for granted. This increases the potential for avoidable behavior problems.
However, a full understanding and conscious implementation of strategies can lead to recognizable improvements in child management skills. Although this section
heightens the awareness of various techniques commonly
used in dental offices today, it should be regarded as only
a start to the study of behavior guidance strategies.

PREAPPOINTMENT BEHAVIOR MODIFICATION
Psychologists have developed many techniques for
modifying patients’ behaviors by using the principles
of learning theory. These techniques are called behavior
modification. Usually they are thought about in conjunction with dentist-patient intraoperatory relationships.
However, preappointment behavior modification, as it
is used here, refers to anything that is said or done to
have a positive influence on the child’s behavior before
the child enters a dental operatory. The merit of this
strategy is that it prepares the pediatric patient and eases the introduction to dentistry. It has received a great
deal of attention because the first dental visit is crucial
in the formation of the child’s attitude toward dentistry.
If the first visit is pleasant, it paves the road for future
successes.
Several methods of preappointment behavior modification are recognized. Films or videotapes have been developed to provide a model for the young patient. The
goal is for the patient to reproduce behavior exhibited by
the model. On the day of the appointment, or perhaps
at a previous visit, the new pediatric patient views the
presentation.
Most modeling studies indicate that there is merit in
introducing children to dentistry in this way, but not all
studies show statistically improved cooperative behavior
on the part of the children. The lack of replication may
be the result of differences in experimental design, dental
teams, or videotapes or films. It suggests a necessity for
careful videotape or film selection for office use.
Preappointment behavior modification can also be
performed with live patient models such as siblings,
other children, or parents. Many dentists allow young
children into the operatory with parents to preview the
dental experience. Because the observing child likely will
be initiated into dental care with a dental examination,
a parent’s recall visit offers an excellent modeling opportunity. On these occasions, many young children climb
into the dental chair after their parents’ appointments.
These previews should be selected carefully. Young children

n

Nonpharmacologic Management of Children’s Behaviors

295

are sometimes frightened by loud noises, as from a highspeed handpiece.
The merits of modeling procedures, commonly involving audiovisual or live models, are recognized by psychologists. Rimm and Masters20 summarized them as follows:
(1) stimulation of new behaviors, (2) facilitation of behavior in a more appropriate manner, (3) disinhibition of
inappropriate behavior due to fear, and (4) extinction of
fears. These procedures offer the practicing dentist some
interesting ways to modify children’s behavior before
their dental visit.
Another behavior modification method involves preappointment parental education via mailings, prerecorded messages, or customized web pages. Precontact with
the parent can provide directions for preparing the child
for an initial dental visit, explain office procedures, and
answer questions. Setting expectations for the first visit
can increase the likelihood of a successful appointment.
Beneficial effects of preappointment mailings were demonstrated in a controlled study by Wright et al.21 Children
seemed better prepared by their mothers, and the dentist
saw more cooperative pediatric patients. Almost all parents understood the letter’s contents, acknowledged the
dentist’s thoughtfulness, and welcomed the concern for
the proper presentation to their children. A similar letter
is shown in Figure 16-2. Dentists using preappointment
educational materials should be selective. Overpreparation could confuse a parent or provoke unnecessary
anxiety.

FUNDAMENTALS OF BEHAVIOR GUIDANCE
Behavior guidance involves the total dental health team.
Indeed, many dental auxiliaries are invaluable when it
comes to providing care for children. All personnel have
a stake in guiding a child through the dental experience.
Over the years, behavior guidance has meant different
things to different people. In 1895 McElroy wrote, “Although the operative dentistry may be perfect, the appointment is a failure if the child departs in tears.”22 This
was the first mention in dental literature of measuring the
success or failure of a child’s appointment by anything
other than technical proficiency. Pediatric dentistry has
progressed since that time, and one definition is the following:
Behavior guidance is the means by which the dental health team effectively and efficiently performs
treatment for a child and, at the same time, instills
a positive dental attitude.
Effectively in this definition refers to the provision of
high-quality dental care. Efficient treatment is a necessity
in private practice today. Quadrant dentistry, or perhaps
half-mouth dentistry, utilizing auxiliary personnel is vital in the delivery of efficient service to children. Finally,
the development of a pediatric patient’s positive attitude
is an integral part of this definition. In the past, many
practitioners have considered “getting the job done” to
be behavior management. The current definition suggests
a great deal more.
What has been omitted from the definition of behavior guidance is interesting. There is no mention of any

296

Chapter 16

n

Nonpharmacologic Management of Children’s Behaviors

Dear Parent:
Children who have pleasant dental appointments when they are very young are likely to have a
favorable outlook toward dental care throughout life. The first appointment is very important in this
attitude formation. That is the reason I am writing to you.
At our first appointment we will examine your child’s teeth and gums and take any necessary x-ray
films. For most children this will be an interesting and even happy occasion. All the people on our staff
enjoy children and know how to work with them, but you, parents, play an important role in getting
children started with a good attitude toward dental care. One of the useful things that you can do is to
be completely natural and easygoing when you tell your child about the appointment with the dentist.
This approach enables children to view their dental visit as an opportunity to meet some new people
who want to help them stay healthy.
Your cooperation is appreciated. Remember, good general health depends partly on the development
of good habits, such as sensible eating, sleeping routines, and exercise. Dental health also depends on
good habits, such as proper toothbrushing, regular dental visits, and a good diet. We will have a
chance to further discuss these points during your child’s appointment.
Sincerely,
Figure 16-2 Letter to assist parents in preparing children for first dental visit. (Adapted from Wright GZ, Alpern GD, Leake JL:

The modifiability of maternal anxiety as it relates to children’s cooperative dental behavior, J Dent Child 40:265-271, 1973.)
specific techniques or modalities of treatment. The definition allows for the exercise of individuality. The challenge
to the dentist is to satisfy the elements of the definition
as frequently as possible and as safely as possible for each
child in a dental practice.
Although various methods in managing pediatric dental patients have evolved over the years, certain practices
and concepts remain fundamental to successful behavior
guidance. These are basic to the establishment of good
dental team–pediatric patient relationships. These practices increase the chances for success in the provision of
care for children. They should be considered inviolate.
The following fundamentals of behavior guidance center
on the attitude and integrity of the entire dental team.

Positive Approach
There is general agreement that the attitude or expectations of the dentist can affect the outcome of a dental
appointment. The child will respond with the type of
behavior expected. In essence, the child fulfills the dentist’s prophecy. Thus positive statements increase the
chances of success with children. They are more effective
than thoughtless questions or remarks. To obtain success
with children, it is important that the dentist anticipate
success.

Team Attitude
Personality factors such as warmth and interest that can
be conveyed without a spoken word are critical when
children are treated. A pleasant smile tells a child that an
adult cares. Children respond best to a natural and friendly attitude. Often this can be conveyed immediately to the
pediatric patient through a casual greeting. Children also
can be made to feel comfortable in the dental office by

the use of nicknames, which can be placed on a patient’s
record. Noting school accomplishments or extracurricular
activities such as scouting, baseball, gymnastics, or other
hobbies helps in initiating future conversations and demonstrates a friendly, caring attitude to a pediatric patient.

Organization
Plans in the dental office have many dimensions, beginning, for example, with the reception area. Who
summons the new patient? The dentist, the dental assistant, the dental hygienist, or the receptionist? If a
child creates a disturbance in the reception area, who
will address the problem? Each dental office must devise its own contingency plans, and the entire office
staff must know in advance what is expected of them
and what is to be done. Such plans are key features of
many pediatric dental offices because they increase efficiency and contribute to successful dental staff–pediatric
patient relationships. Also, a well-organized, written
treatment plan must be available for the dental office
team. Delays and indecisiveness can build apprehension
in young patients.

Truthfulness
Unlike adults, most children see things as either “black”
or “white.” The shades between are difficult for them to
discern. To youngsters, the dental health team is either
truthful or not. Because truthfulness is extremely important in building trust, it is a fundamental principle in
caring for children. Recognizing and acknowledging a
patient’s fear and anxiety can strengthen that trust. Empathizing with, rather than denying, such emotions helps
provide assurance that the dentist appreciates the patient
as an individual.

Chapter 16

Tolerance
Tolerance level, a seldom-discussed concept, varies from
person to person. It refers to the dentist’s ability to cope
rationally with misbehaviors while maintaining composure. Recognizing individual tolerance levels is especially
important in the treatment of children. In addition to
varying from person to person, tolerance levels fluctuate for a given individual. For example, an upsetting experience at home can affect the clinician’s mood in the
dental office. Some people are in a better frame of mind
early in the morning, whereas the coping abilities of others improve as the day progresses. Thus afternoon people
should instruct receptionists not to book children with
behavior problems the first thing in the morning. Learning to recognize factors that overtax tolerance levels is another fundamental because it prevents loss of self-control.

Flexibility
Because children lack maturity, the dental team must be
prepared to change its plans at times. A child may begin fretting or squirming in the dental chair after half
an hour, and the treatment intended for that day may
have to be divided into multiple appointments. On the
other hand, a dentist may plan a step-wise indirect pulp
treatment, but because the child is difficult, the indirect
pulp procedure may have to be completed during a single
session. Many dentists, following accepted four-handed
dentistry practices, work at the 11 o’clock or 12 o’clock
position. Treatment of small children may demand a
change in operating position. Thus the dental team must
be as flexible as the situation demands.

COMMUNICATING WITH CHILDREN
Several effective communication techniques can be suggested. These key points are guidelines and not inflexible rules, because in the unpredictable world of pediatric
health care, one must always be prepared to improvise.

Establishment of Communication
Previous editions of this textbook have stated that the
first objective in the successful management of the young
child is to establish communication. Involving a child
in a conversation not only enables the dentist to learn
about the patient but also may relax the child. There are
many ways of initiating verbal communication, and the
effectiveness of these approaches differs with the age of
the child. Generally, verbal communication with younger
children is best initiated with complimentary comments,
followed by questions that elicit an answer other than
“yes” or “no.”

Establishment of the Communicator
Members of the dental team must be aware of their roles
when communicating with a pediatric patient. Generally, the dental assistant talks with the child during the
transfer from reception room to the operatory and during preparation of the child in the dental chair. When
the dentist arrives, the dental assistant usually assumes
a more passive role, because the child can listen to only
one person at a time. It is important that communication
occur from a single source. When both dentist and dental

n

Nonpharmacologic Management of Children’s Behaviors

297

assistant provide directions, the result may be a response
that is undesirable simply because the child becomes confused. The same holds true when parents are present in
the operatory. The communication must be primarily bidirectional, between the dentist and the child.

Message Clarity
Communication is a complex, multisensory process. It includes a transmitter, a medium, and a receiver. The dentist or dental health team is the transmitter, the spoken
word frequently is the medium, and the pediatric patient
is the receiver. The message must be understood in the
same way by both the sender and the receiver.
Very often, to improve the clarity of messages to young
patients, dentists use euphemisms to explain procedures.
For pediatric dentists, euphemisms or word substitutes are
like a second language. Examples of word substitutes that
can be used to explain procedures to children are given
in Box 16-3.
It is important to be careful in selecting words and
phrases used to indoctrinate the new pediatric dental patient because for the young child, language labels are the
basis for many generalizations. The classic example is the
language label for “doctor,” which confuses many youngsters. This is known as mediated generalization. Eventually,
as a result of experiences, the child learns that the “dentist doctor” is different from the “physician doctor” and
that the physician’s office and the dentist’s office are different environments. The process of sorting out such differences is referred to as discrimination.

Voice Control
Throughout the dental literature, reference is made to
voice control. It is difficult to describe this effective communicative technique using the written word. Sudden
and firm commands are used to get the child’s attention
or to stop the child’s undesirable behavior. Another form
of voice control is a slow and deliberate cadence that can
function like music to set a mood. In both cases, how it
is said is more important than what is said because the

Box 16-3
Word Substitutes for Explaining Procedures
to Children
DENTAL TERMINOLOGY

WORD SUBSTITUTES

Rubber dam
Rubber dam clamp
Rubber dam frame
Sealant
Fluoride varnish
Air syringe
Water syringe
Suction
Alginate
Study models
High speed
Low speed

Rubber raincoat
Tooth button
Coat rack
Tooth paint
Tooth vitamins
Wind gun
Water gun
Vacuum cleaner
Pudding
Statues
Whistle
Motorcycle

298

Chapter 16

n

Nonpharmacologic Management of Children’s Behaviors

dentist is attempting to influence behavior directly, not
through understanding.
Although dentists have long recognized the merits of
employing voice control when children’s behaviors have
been disruptive, Greenbaum and colleagues have given
it scientific credence.23 Considering the use of loud commands as a punishment technique, they compared the
effects of loud and normal voice commands given to 40
children with potential behavior problems. Their findings
demonstrated that loud commands reduced disruptive
behaviors.
Chambers’ theory is that voice control is most effective
when used in conjunction with other communications.24
A sudden command of “Stop crying and pay attention!”
may be a necessary preliminary measure for future communication. The same message spoken in a foreign language probably would be equally effective in stopping
disruptive patient behavior that was preventing communication. Used properly in correct situations, voice
control is an effective behavior guidance tool. However,
because parents may find voice control to be an aversive
technique, discussing this technique with parents prior
to its use may decrease the risk for misunderstanding.25

Multisensory Communication
In verbal communications, the focus is on what to say
or how it is said. However, nonverbal messages can also
be sent to patients or received from them. Body contact
can be a form of nonverbal communication. The dentist’s
simple act of placing a hand on a child’s shoulder while
sitting on a chairside stool conveys a feeling of warmth
and friendship. Greenbaum and colleagues found that
this type of physical contact helped children to relax, especially those from 7 to 10 years of age.23
Eye contact is also important. The child who avoids
it often is not fully prepared to cooperate. Apprehension
can be conveyed without a spoken word. Detecting a
rapid heartbeat or noticing beads of perspiration on the
face are observations that alert the dentist to a child’s
nervousness. When the dentist talks to children, every effort should be made not to tower above them. Sitting and
speaking at eye level allow for friendlier and less authoritative communications.

Problem Ownership
In difficult situations, dentists sometimes forget that
they are guiding the behavior of children. They begin
by sending “you” messages, for example, “You stop that
immediately!” or “If you don’t stay still, we will have
to hold your hands.” “You” messages have been termed
roadblocks to communication; instead of gaining cooperation, they only undermine the rapport between a pediatric patient and dentist. Nash discussed that “you”
messages may impugn a child’s character, depreciate
him as a person, shatter his self-esteem, underscore his
inadequacies, and cast judgment.26 They are more likely
to provoke conflict and rebellion than “I” messages. “I”
messages reflect the practitioner’s experience and disclose the focus of the problem, such as “I can’t fix your
teeth if you don’t open your mouth wide.” They are
honest, clear, and inarguable. This self-disclosing asser-

tiveness is one technique that is particularly well suited
to increase the flow of information between the dentist
and the pediatric patient.
A technique that encourages the use of “you” is attending. Attending describes the desirable conduct to
help shape compliance.10 For example, “You are staying
so still” reinforces the specific cooperative behavior that
is necessary for the treatment to be completed. Positive
attention to discrete behaviors confirms to children that
they are doing what was requested and can nurture the
relationship between patients and providers.

Active Listening
Listening is important in the treatment of children.
Children express their feelings by word and by action.
Listening to the spoken words may be more important
in establishing rapport with the older child, whereas attention to nonverbal behavior is often more crucial in
guiding the behavior of a younger child. Active listening
mirrors the communicated emotion. Whether the child
says “I’m scared” or hesitates in opening his mouth,
the dentist needs to acknowledge, not ignore, what the
child is feeling. Sensitivity to the expressed emotions
can reassure the child and encourage genuine communication. The patient is stimulated to express feelings,
and the dentist does the same, as necessary processes in
communication.

Appropriate Responses
Another principle in communicating with children is
that the response should be appropriate to the situation.
The appropriateness of the response depends primarily
on the extent and nature of the relationship with the
child, the age of the child, and evaluation of the motivation of the child’s behavior. An inappropriate response
would be a dentist’s displaying extreme displeasure with
an anxious young child on the first visit, when there has
been insufficient time to establish a good rapport. On the
other hand, if a dentist has made inroads with a child,
who then displays unacceptable behavior, a dentist may
well express disapproval without losing personal control.
The response is then appropriate.

BEHAVIOR SHAPING
Behavior shaping is a common nonpharmacologic technique. It is a form of behavior modification; hence, it
is based on the established principles of social learning.
By definition, it is that procedure which very slowly
develops behavior by reinforcing successive approximations of the desired behavior until the desired behavior
occurs. Proponents of the theory hold that most behavior is learned and that learning is the establishment of a
connection between a stimulus and a response. For this
reason, it is sometimes called stimulus-response (S-R)
theory.
When shaping behavior, the dental assistant or dentist
is teaching a child how to behave. Young children are
led through these procedures step by step. Patients have
to be communicative and cooperative to absorb information that may be complex for them. The following is an
outline for a behavior-shaping model:  

Chapter 16

1.	State the general goal or task to the child at the outset.
2.	Explain the necessity for the procedure. A child who
understands the reason is more likely to cooperate.
3.	Divide the explanation for the procedure. Children
cannot always grasp the overall procedure with a
single explanation; consequently, they have to be led
through the procedure slowly.
4.	Give all explanations at a child’s level of understanding. Use euphemisms appropriately.
5.	Use successive approximations. Since its introduction
in 1959, tell-show-do has remained a cornerstone of
behavior guidance. It is a series of successive approximations, and it should be used routinely by all
members of the dental team who work with children.
Dental assistants, dental hygienists, and dentists
should demonstrate various instruments step by step
before their application by telling, showing, and doing. When the dentist works intraorally, a pediatric
patient should be shown as much of the procedure as
possible. Only when the child has a view of the procedures being undertaken are successive approximations
being performed properly (Fig. 16-3).
6.	Reinforce appropriate behavior. Be as specific as possible
because specific reinforcement is more effective than a
generalized approach. Immediate and specific reinforcements can reduce children’s fear-related behaviors.

Figure 16-3 Child views intraoral procedure with hand

mirror. If mirror blocks light to oral cavity, smaller mirror is
used. With fiberoptic handpieces, blockage of light is not a
problem.

n

Nonpharmacologic Management of Children’s Behaviors

299

7.	Disregard minor inappropriate behavior. Ignored minor misbehavior tends to extinguish itself when not
reinforced.
  
Behavior shaping is regarded as a learning model.
The most efficient learning models are those that follow the
learning theory model most closely. Deviations from
the model create less efficiency in terms of learning. One
way to improve consistency in this area is for the dental
team to record various clinical sessions with pediatric patients and then to review the recordings, keeping in mind
the basics of the behavior-shaping learning model.
Although tell-show-do is similar to behavior shaping,
the two differ. In addition to demanding the reinforcement of cooperative behavior, behavior shaping also
includes the need for steps to be retraced if misbehavior
occurs. For example, if a child is shown an instrument
and looks away, the dentist must go back to the explanatory portion of the procedure. Behavior shaping requires
that the “desired behavior” be observed along the way. If
the dentist proceeds along the sequential steps and begins
performing treatment when the desired behavior is not
present, there is deviation from the learning model and a
greater likelihood of increased misbehavior.

RETRAINING
Children who require retraining approach the dental office displaying considerable apprehension or negative behavior. The demonstrated behavior may be the result of a
previous dental visit or the effect of improper parental or
peer orientation. Determining the source of the problem
is helpful because the undesirable behavior can then be
avoided through another technique or deemphasized, or
a distraction can be used. These ploys begin the retraining program, which eventually leads to behavior shaping.
When encountering negative behavior, the dentist
should always remember that an objective is to build a
new series of associations in the child’s mind. If a child’s
expectation of being hurt is not reinforced, a new set of expectations is learned. The dentist can be trusted! The child
develops a new perception of the dental office and a new
relationship to dentistry. Unacceptable behavior previously learned extinguishes. It is critical to remember that the
stimulus must be altered to elicit a change in the response.
Individuals respond to stimuli to which they have been
preconditioned. If the original stimulus and the new one
are very similar, then the response will be similar. This is
known as stimulus generalization. If a child has had an unpleasant experience in the dental office and then is taken
to a different office where there is a different dentist and
an entirely different staff and surroundings, the child still
tends to generalize that an unpleasant event will occur in
this new dental office. There are enough similar stimuli
to produce this response. To offset the generalization, the
dental team must demonstrate a “difference.” This is one of
the reasons why the use of nitrous oxide–oxygen sedation
often works when retraining children. It offers a difference.

AVERSIVE CONDITIONING
The behavior modification method of aversive conditioning is also known as hand-over-mouth exercise (HOME).27
Its purpose is to gain the attention of a highly oppositional

300

Chapter 16

n

Nonpharmacologic Management of Children’s Behaviors

child so that communication can be established and cooperation obtained for a safe course of treatment. The
technique fits the rules of learning theory: maladaptive
acts (screaming, kicking) are linked to restraint (hand over
mouth), and cooperative behavior is related to removal
of the restriction and the use of positive reinforcement
(praise). It is important to stress that aversive conditioning
should not be used routinely but as a method of last resort,
usually with children from three to six years of age who
have appropriate communicative abilities.
Over the years, attitudes toward HOME have changed.
Surveys of pediatric dentistry diplomates in 1972 and
1981 demonstrated acceptance by a substantial portion
of the profession. In both instances, more than 80% of
the pediatric dentists indicated that they used aversive
therapy at times. However, Adair28 reported that HOME
was used by a distinct minority of pediatric dentists. The
greatest frequency of use was by older men, likely reflecting attitudes and training during their residency programs. Oeuis and colleagues surveyed pediatric dentists
in 2007, following the removal of HOME from AAPD’s
clinical practice guidelines.29 Interestingly, this survey
found a greater usage of HOME (44%), with half believing HOME to be an acceptable technique. The authors
noted that this could be due to response bias. That said,
32% of practitioners believed that it may cause psychological harm to the child. Inquiring into acceptance of
the technique by dental educators, Adair28 found that
54% thought the technique was unacceptable, and 18%
did not teach it at all. Some parents, too, have disapproved of the technique (Eaton17 found it the only
technique rated unacceptable by parents), and another
concern has been a legal one. The acceptance of aversive conditioning by the dental professional is not an
absolute assurance of the legality of the technique. Aversive conditioning can be a safe and effective method of
managing a child with an extremely difficult behavior
problem. However, any departure from the accepted application of aversive conditioning may expose the dentist to liability. Those dentists or dental students who
contemplate using it should consult detailed writings in
advance. Dentists should be aware of the acceptability of
the technique in their practice location. Bross cautioned
that once a technique is found to be legally unacceptable
in one instance, a legal risk arises if full consent is not
gained or if the procedure is used.30

PRACTICAL CONSIDERATIONS
Some procedural aspects of dental practice help guide
children successfully through their dental experiences.
Like many of the techniques described previously, they
have evolved over the years without being experimentally
tested. Nevertheless, these practical considerations form
an integral part of present-day dental practice. They also
would be fruitful areas for future research.

Scheduling
Children are bundles of energy. Lacking the patience of
adults, many children become restless and tired when
faced with long delays in a reception area. This should
be taken into account when designing an office schedule.

A good general rule is that a child should not be kept
waiting in the reception area and that every effort should
be made to be on time.
Morning appointment times have been suggested for
children. It is a practice that has guided scheduling in
many dental offices because children are more alert and
the dental team is fresher in the morning. Many dentists
also believe that when age groups are kept together
(preschoolers in the morning and older children in the
afternoon), the peer group has a positive influence, with
children serving as models for each other. Another advantage is that the dental office may run more smoothly with
less psychological change of pace.
Sometimes expediency rather than a realistic evaluation of a child’s behavior may predispose the dentist
toward morning appointments for preschool children.
Frequently, it is easier to persuade parents to take younger
children out of nursery school or kindergarten than to
arrange morning appointments for elementary or junior
high school children. From a behavioral standpoint, other factors seem important when appointment times are
determined. Patient-related concerns include patient age,
presence of a handicapping condition, and need for any
sedation. The dentist’s attitude is also important. Some
dentists avoid seeing children with behavior problems
first thing in the morning. A policy regarding scheduling should be formulated by the dentist, and scheduling
should not be left to chance.
Another scheduling concern has been appointment
length. Historically, writers have agreed that the nature
of childhood precludes giving the sustained attention
that may be required for long dental visits. Generally, a
long visit is defined as any period in excess of half an
hour. Most of these views were expressed more than 35
years ago, and appointments have increased in duration.
Improved technology, the application of time and motion studies by efficiency experts, and the current trend
toward quadrant or half-mouth dentistry have altered
contemporary practices. Because evidence of the effect of
appointment duration on patient cooperation is divided,
this remains a question for researchers. Appointment duration should not be extended beyond a patient’s tolerance level solely for the practice’s convenience.

Parent-Child Separation
Years ago, parents did not expect to enter the operatory.
Today’s parents actively participate in health care services
through the process of informed consent, and increasingly want to accompany their children during their health
care experiences. Having parents stay with their child can
streamline informed consent and communication into
the normal office flow. Adair and colleagues31 found that
a clear majority of pediatric dentists in all age/gender
groups allowed parents to be present in the operatory for
a variety of procedures. In addition to increasing communication efficiency, parental presence can reassure both
the child and the parent. Parents can witness the dentist’s compassionate approach and hear the educational
instructions provided to the children. At the same time,
the dentist obtains rapid feedback on parental attitudes
and beliefs.

Chapter 16

A parent can be a major asset in supporting and communicating with a child who has a disability, often
providing important information and interpretation. Because of the close symbiotic relationship that very young
children (those who have not reached the age of understanding and full verbal communication) have with their
parents, they often remain together. Excluding the parent from the operatory could be justified for many reasons, including parental interference and limitations on
dentist-child interactions. With older children, an independent experience may contribute toward development
of confidence and appropriate coping mechanisms and,
ultimately, a positive attitude on the part of the child.
Another reason for advocating a separation policy is that
the dentist may be more relaxed and comfortable when
the parent remains in the reception area, so as not to be
perceived as “performing.” As a consequence of this more
relaxed manner, the dentist’s actions are likely to have a
more positive effect on the child’s behavior.
The separation procedure warrants serious consideration. The dentist must develop an office policy, inform
the office staff, and assume responsibility to train office
personnel in reception room strategies. In this age of accountability, the dentist may also have to explain the
policy to a parent. Establishment of the policy should
therefore be based on a rationale that takes into account
the benefits and drawbacks resulting from separation, the
benefits to the individual child, and the dental team’s personal comfort level. Because some dentists become tense
when parents are present and others enjoy having parents
in the operatory, an office policy becomes, to some extent, an individual decision.

Tangible Reinforcements
Giving gifts to children has become a fact of commercial
life in North America. There is general agreement on the
merit of this practice in the dental office; gift-giving can
serve as a reward. If the gift has a dental significance (e.g.,
a toothbrush kit), so much the better. In these situations
the gift is also used to reinforce the importance of oral
health.
Various trinkets in a toy chest should be used as tokens
of affection for children, not as bribes. The gift-giving
practice can have spectacular results. Many children who
seem tense during operative procedures suddenly perk up
when the procedures are completed and scurry for a gift.
These gifts provide a pleasant reminder of the appointment.

LIMITATIONS
Today’s children differ from those of past generations.
They begin school earlier. Through the media, they are
more aware than children were years ago. We hear more
of children facing poverty, experiencing learning disorders, and developing poor coping skills, and are more
aware of children with eating disorders and drug use.
Children also have legal and social advocates who have
influenced management techniques. Limitations on the
dentist exist today that were unheard of previously.
Parenting also has changed. Much of the behavioral
science research was done with traditional families in

n

Nonpharmacologic Management of Children’s Behaviors

301

the 1960s and 1970s. Single-parent homes were less common, and terms such as reconstituted families and same-sex
marriages were unknown. What about the child-rearing
practices in these families? Decades ago, when “father”
came to the office, it usually meant that the child had
a behavior problem and “father” was the enforcer. With
both parents working or with single-parent families, it
is not unusual for a father to accompany a child to the
dental office. Have parental expectations changed in the
dental office? Yes. This chapter discusses the reasons why
parents might be excluded from the operatory, but it also
urges periodic review of the policy. Many parents insist
on their right to accompany their child. Societal changes
influence our management methods, and there is a need
to review past research carefully and assess its applicability to the present.
Dentists also face societal limitations, and they are
changing their approaches to management. Years ago,
the HOME technique might have been used to subdue
a 3-year-old so that the dentist could perform an examination. This chapter does not describe the technique in
detail because it is not used by most of today’s dentists.
Parental influences, as well as legal and ethical concerns,
have resulted in a decreased or discontinued use of controversial techniques like HOME. Dental students rarely
have the opportunity to observe or use the technique.
The corners of the pediatric treatment triangle have
been changing rapidly, which influences the practice of
dentistry for children. Recognizing these changing times,
the Council on Clinical Affairs of AAPD has produced
guidelines for behavior guidance.25 The techniques recommended in this chapter conform to these guidelines.
However, there are limitations to written standards; these
standards change. Dental students and dentists must remember to keep abreast of the times in this highly dynamic
area.

REFERENCES
1.	Wright GZ, Kupietzky A: Introductory remarks. In Wright
GZ, Kupietzky A, editors: Behavior management in dentistry for
children, ed 2, Wiley Blackwell, Ames, Iowa, 2014, pp 3–9.
2.	Juntgen LM, Sanders BJ, Walker LA, et al.: Factors influencing behavior guidance: a survey of practicing pediatric dentists, Pediatr Dent 35:539–545, 2013.
3.	Boyce WT: The lifelong effects of early childhood adversity
and toxic stress, Pediatr Dent 36:102–108, 2014.
4.	Gesell A, Ilg FL: Child development: an introduction to the study
of human growth, New York, NY, 1949, Harper & Row.
5.	Binet A: New methods for the diagnosis of the intellectual
level of subnormals, L’Année Psychologique 12:191–244, 1905.
6.	Klingberg G, Broberg AG: Dental fear/anxiety and dental behaviour management problems in children and adolescents:
a review of prevalence and concomitant psychological factors, Int J Paediatr Dent 17:391–406, 2007.
7.	Blomqvist M, Ek U, Fernell E, Homberg K, Westerlund J,
Dahllöf G: Cognitive ability and dental fear and anxiety, Eur
J Oral Sci 121:117–120, 2013.
8.	Klingberg G, Berggren U, Carlsson SG, Norén JG: Child dental fear: cause-related factors and clinical effects, Eur J Oral Sci
103:405–412, 1995.
9.	Long N: Stress and economic hardship: the impact on children and parents, Pediatr Dent 36:109–114, 2014.

302

Chapter 16

n

Nonpharmacologic Management of Children’s Behaviors

10.	Fisher-Owens S: Broadening perspectives on pediatric oral
health care provision: social determinants of health and behavior management, Pediatr Dent 36:115–120, 2014.
11.	Wright GZ: Behavior management in dentistry for children, Philadelphia, 1975, WB Saunders.
12.	Frankl SN, Shiere FR, Fogels HR: Should the parent remain in
the operatory? J Dent Child 29:150–163, 1962.
13.	Goleman J: Cultural factors affecting behavior guidance and
family compliance, Pediatr Dent 36:121–127, 2014.
14.	Murphy ML, Fields Jr HW, Machen JB: Parental acceptance
of pediatric dentistry behavior techniques, Pediatr Dent 6:
193–198, 1984.
15.	Lawrence SM, McTigue DM, Wilson S, et al.: Parental attitudes toward behavior management techniques in pediatric
dentistry, Pediatr Dent 13:151–155, 1991.
16.	Eaton JJ, McTigue DJ, Fields Jr HW, Beck M: Attitudes of contemporary parents toward behavior management techniques
used in pediatric dentistry, Pediatr Dent 27:107–113, 2005.
17.	Fields Jr HW, Machen JB, Murphy MG: The acceptability of
various behavior management techniques relative to types of
treatment, Pediatr Dent 6:199–203, 1984.
18.	Casamassimo P, Wilson S, Gross L: Effects of changing US
parenting styles on dental practice: perceptions of diplomates of the American Board of Pediatric Dentistry, Pediatric
Dent 2:18–22, 2002.
19.	Watt RG: Motivational interviewing may be effective in dental setting, Evid Based Dent 11:13, 2010.
20.	Rimm DC, Masters JC: Behavior therapy: techniques and empirical findings, New York, 1974, Academic Press.
21.	Wright GZ, Alpern GD, Leake JL: The modifiability of maternal anxiety as it relates to children’s cooperative dental
behavior, J Dent Child 40:265–271, 1973.

22.	McElroy CM: Dentistry for children, Calif Dent Assoc Trans
85, 1895.
23.	Greenbaum PE, Lumley MA, Turner C, Melamed BG: Dentist’s reassuring touch: effects on children’s behavior, Pediatr
Dent 15:20–24, 1993.
24.	Chambers DW: Behavior management techniques for pediatric dentists: an embarrassment of riches, J Dent Child
44:30–34, 1977.
25.	American Academy of Pediatric Dentistry: Guideline on Behavior Guidance for the Pediatric Dental Patient, Pediatr Dent
35(Spec Issue):175–187, 2014.
26.	Nash DA: Engaging children’s cooperation in the dental environment through effective communication, Pediatr Dent
28:455–459, 2006.
27.	Levitas TC: HOME—Hand over mouth exercise, J Dent Child
41:178–182, 1974.
28.	Adair SM, et al.: A survey of members of the American Academy of Pediatric Dentistry on their use of behavior management techniques, Pediatr Dent 26:159–166, 2004.
29.	Oueis HS, Ralstrom E, Miriyala V, et al.: Alternatives for hand
over mouth exercise after its elimination from the clinical
guidelines of the American Academy of Pediatric Dentistry,
Pediatr Dent 32:223–228, 2010.
30.	Bross DC: Managing pediatric dental patients: issues raised
by the law and changing views of proper child care, Pediatr
Dent 26:125–130, 2004.
31.	Adair SM, Schafer TE, Waller JL, Rockman RA: Age and gender differences in the use of behavior management techniques by pediatric dentists, Pediatr Dent 29:403–408, 2007.

CHAPTER

17

Pharmacologic Management
of Patient Behavior
s Mark A. Saxen

For additional resources, please visit the

website.

CHAPTER OUTLINE
DEFINITION OF TERMS
Pharmacologic Management
The Continuum of Anesthesia and
Sedation
FUNDAMENTAL CONCEPTS
Anatomic and Physiologic
Differences
Routes of Drug Administration
Drugs and Agents Used for Sedation
Nitrous Oxide
Antihistamines

Benzodiazepine Agonists and
Antagonists
Opioid Agonists and Antagonists
Other Sedative-Hypnotics
NITROUS OXIDE ADMINISTRATION
Objectives
Equipment
Technique
Monitoring and Documentation
ENTERAL SEDATION TECHNIQUE
COMBINATIONS OF METHODS
AND AGENTS

DEFINITION OF TERMS
PHARMACOLOGIC MANAGEMENT
Pharmacologic management is a broad term that describes
the use of drugs to manage the behavior of pediatric patients undergoing dental procedures. The types of drugs
used include inhaled gases, oral medications, drugs administered via intravenous infusion, intramuscular injection,
and other routes of administration. Pharmacologic management is further divided into two subcategories, sedation
and general anesthesia.1 This chapter will focus on minimal
and moderate sedation (formerly termed “conscious sedation”), as administered by the dentist while simultaneously
performing dental procedures in the dental office.
Dentists often think of sedation as a limited form of
anesthesia that falls within the broader realm of behavior management (Fig. 17-1). In contrast, anesthesiologists
view sedation as part of a broader physiologic continuum
that ranges from an awake, relaxed, conscious state to unconscious with no responsiveness. The level of sedation
often changes during the course of medical and dental
procedures, and the distinction between different levels of
sedation and general anesthesia is not always well defined
(Fig. 17-2). When sedation is administered to children, respiratory depression and loss of protective reflexes may occur rapidly and unexpectedly, regardless of the intended
level of sedation. Furthermore, maintaining a sustained
level of moderate sedation can be difficult. Dr. Charles
Cote, the well-known pediatric anesthesiologist and educator, maintains that the term “conscious sedation” is an
oxymoron when applied to young children. “When caring

FACILITIES AND EQUIPMENT
DOCUMENTATION
PATIENT SELECTION
AND PREPARATION
Indications
Preoperative Evaluation
Informed Consent
Instructions to Parents
MONITORING
Intraoperative Monitoring
Postoperative Monitoring
CONCLUDING THOUGHTS

for young children, particularly when they have to remain
quiet for any length of time, one must induce pharmacologic coma” (deep sedation/general anesthesia).2
Incorporating sedation into a dental practice requires
knowledge and skills beyond the scope of many predoctoral education programs. Very few dentists pursue the
advanced residency training required to administer general anesthesia in a dental office. Pediatric dental residency programs provide training that allows pediatric
dentists to administer minimal and moderate sedation in
their practices. Professional and state standards usually require additional trained staff to be present when sedation
is administered to dental patients.3 Taken together, these
reasons illustrate why the term pharmacologic management
remains nebulous and may explain why it is not commonly and universally practiced by pediatric dentists.4
In spite of these issues, pharmacologic management
provides a valuable component to the pediatric dental
practice. Safe and effective practice of this skill requires
a broad understanding of the pharmacology, physiology,
current professional standards, and relevant outcomes.

THE CONTINUUM OF ANESTHESIA
AND SEDATION
The concept of a spectrum of anesthesia is essential to a
proper understanding of anesthesia and sedation. It is the
basis for the American Dental Association’s Guidelines for
the Use of Sedation and General Anesthesia by Dentists
and provides a framework for many state dental board
regulations, hospital privileges, and professional liability
insurance policies. Although the levels of anesthesia exist
303

304

Chapter 17

n

Pharmacologic Management of Patient Behavior

Pharmacologic behavior
guidance (using medicine
to control your child’s behavior)

Nonpharmacologic behavior
guidance (not using medicine
to control your child’s behavior)

Level of cooperation required by your child
(very cooperative)
* Tell, show, do
Simply trying to be
extra nice

* Nitrous oxide
(happy gas)
(est. cost - $)

(cooperative)
* Voice modulation
(being firm verbally)

* Moderate sedation
(est. cost - $$)

* Office-based
anesthesia
(est. cost - $$$)

(less cooperative)

* Separation

* Time out
(not very cooperative)

* Hospital-based
anesthesia
(est. cost - $$$$)

* Physical stabilization
(papoose wrap)

Figure 17-1 Behavior Guidance Flowchart. (Adapted from the private practice of Dr. Matthew Pate, Kokomo, Indiana.)

The Continuum of Anesthesia and Sedation
General anesthesia
Deep sedation
Moderate sedation
Minimal sedation
Anxiolysis

Figure 17-2 Clinical assessment of the level of sedation is

usually not as straightforward as the definitions of various levels of anesthesia imply. There is considerable overlap among
the levels of sedation, and a patient’s level of sedation may
easily change throughout the course of a procedure. For this
reason, proper vigilance and monitoring are essential for the
safe administration of sedation and anesthesia.
on a continuum, the spectrum defines the various levels
of sedation and anesthesia as follows.
Minimal sedation – a minimally depressed level of consciousness, produced by a pharmacologic method that
­retains the patient’s ability to maintain an airway independently and continuously and respond normally to tactile
stimulation and verbal commands. Although cognitive
function and coordination may be modestly ­impaired, ventilatory and cardiovascular functions are unaffected. When
the intent is minimal sedation for adults, the ­appropriate

initial dosing of a single enteral drug is no more than the
maximum recommended dose (MRD) of a drug that can be
prescribed for unmonitored home use.
Moderate sedation – a drug-induced depression of consciousness during which patients respond purposefully
to verbal commands, either alone or accompanied by
light tactile stimulation. No interventions are required to
maintain a patent airway, and spontaneous ventilation is
adequate. Cardiovascular function is usually maintained.
Repeated dosing of an agent before the effects of previous
dosing can be fully appreciated may result in a greater alteration of the state of consciousness than the dentist intends.
A patient whose only response is reflex withdrawal
from a painful stimulus is not considered to be in a state
of minimal or moderate sedation. Drugs used to produce
a state of minimal or moderate sedation should carry a
margin of safety sufficiently wide to avoid unintended
loss of consciousness.
Deep sedation – a drug-induced depression of consciousness during which patients cannot be easily aroused but
respond purposefully following repeated or painful stimulation. The ability to maintain ventilatory function
­independently may be impaired. Patients may require assistance in maintaining a patent airway, and spontaneous
ventilation may be inadequate. Cardiovascular function
is usually maintained.
General anesthesia – a drug-induced loss of consciousness
during which patients are not arousable, even by painful

Chapter 17

stimulation. The ability to maintain ventilatory function independently is often impaired. Patients often require assistance in maintaining a patent airway, and positive pressure
ventilation may be required because of depressed spontaneous ventilation or drug-induced depression of neuromuscular function. Cardiovascular function may be impaired.
Because sedation and general anesthesia are on a continuum, practitioners intending to produce minimal or
moderate sedation should be able to diagnose and manage the physiologic consequences of patients whose level
of sedation becomes deeper than initially intended. The
term “rescue” is often used to describe this management,
and refers to steps taken to return the patient to the initially desired level of sedation.5
It is important to note the absence of any mention of
routes of administration in these definitions. Prior to the
twenty-first century, it was common for many state dental
boards and other institutions to delineate privileges and
guidelines for “intravenous sedation” or “oral sedation.”
These terms are inherently misleading, because the level of
sedation is completely independent of the route of administration. For example, one is capable of producing general
anesthesia with oral medications, and a state of minimal
sedation can easily be obtained through an intravenous
route. Similarly, the term “conscious sedation,” a term
originally coined to describe the sedation of dental patients, is purposefully avoided in these definitions, because
consciousness is not clearly defined and is always limited
to a particular level of sedation. Although terms like “oral
sedation,” “IV sedation,” and “conscious sedation” continue to be used in dentistry today, they are anachronistic,
potentially misleading, and should be avoided.6

FUNDAMENTAL CONCEPTS
The goals of sedation for the pediatric patient are (1) to
guard the patient’s safety and welfare; (2) to minimize
physical discomfort and pain; (3) to control anxiety, minimize psychological trauma, and maximize the potential
for amnesia; (4) to control behavior or movement so that
the procedure can be completed safely; and (5) to return
the patient to a physiologic state in which safe discharge,
as determined according to recognized criteria, is possible.7
Having a systematic routine to follow during sedation is
an essential element of safe practice. The sedation routine
should be reflected in the documentation an office uses for
every step of the process. This includes preoperative evaluation, physical assessment, intraoperative and postoperative
notes, and follow-up notes. The simple process of following
a well-conceived procedural checklist has been demonstrated to reduce preventable errors in all areas of health care.8
Outcomes assessment is also a critical element of safe
sedation practice. The practice of obtaining follow-up
data and recording outcomes in a systematic database is
not currently as strong in dentistry as it is in medicine, yet
it is no less critical. Analysis of data derived from followup phone calls and other postoperative assessments helps
the dentist identify previously unappreciated treatment
sequelae and also gauge the appropriateness of his/her
discharge criteria, an area previously underappreciated by
many sedation practitioners.9,10

n

Pharmacologic Management of Patient Behavior

305

ANATOMIC AND PHYSIOLOGIC DIFFERENCES
The adage “children are not small adults” is well appreciated by clinicians who treat children on a regular basis.
Physiologic systems grow and develop at different rates,
particularly in children under the age of 8 years. A sound
understanding of the anatomic and physiologic differences of children is crucial to the safe practice of pharmacologic management, which is most typically used to
manage preschool-aged children.

Central Nervous System
Although the brain of a full-term newborn accounts for approximately 10% of the total body weight, only 25% of
the neuronal cells of an adult are present at birth. Growth
in the CNS of a newborn is extremely rapid, with brain
weight doubling by the age of 6 months and tripling by
12 months. By 12 months, brain stem and cortex neuronal
cell development is nearly complete; however, myelination
lags behind and is not complete until the third year of life.
In the last decade, research performed in nonhuman
primates has suggested that several anesthetic and sedative
drugs may be toxic to developing neurons, leading to concern about the possible damaging effects of sedation and
anesthesia on infants and young children. While the relevance of these studies to humans remains unknown, two
large-scale studies are currently under way to determine the
clinical relevance of these findings. The Pediatric Anesthesia and Neurodevelopment Assessment study (PANDA) is a
multicenter study investigating the neurodevelopment of
children in the United States who have undergone general
anesthesia prior to age three. The General Anesthesia Spinal
study (GAS) is a worldwide, multinational comparison of
children who have undergone either general anesthesia or
spinal anesthesia.11 With an estimated 10 million anesthetic procedures performed on children aged three and under
in the United States each year, the importance of research
in this area cannot be overestimated.12

Cardiovascular System
Autonomic control of the heart is a balance between the
sympathetic and parasympathetic nervous systems; however, these two systems develop at different rates. The
parasympathetic system controls heart rate in utero and
is fully intact at birth, whereas the sympathetic control
begins shortly after birth and continues to develop in
the first several months of life. Wide variations in heart
rate can continue for several months and even appear
in young children as a result of variations in autonomic
tone.13
The heart of a newborn infant is characterized by an
immature left ventricle and myocardium. In contrast to
fully mature hearts, the infant heart cannot use changes in
myocardial contractility to increase cardiac output in times
of stress. Heart rate is the major determinant of cardiac
output of a young child’s heart. Myocardial contracti­
lity continues to develop in the toddler, reaching nearadult levels of contractility by the age of 8 years. This rate
dependency of the pediatric heart is reflected in normal
heart rate values, which drop from a rate of 120 ± 20 in a
6-month-old infant to 90 ± 10 in a 5-year-old and 70 ± 17

306

Chapter 17

n

Pharmacologic Management of Patient Behavior

Table 17-1
Vital Signs at Various Ages
Age (yr)

Heart Rate
(beats/min)

Blood Pressure
(mm Hg)

Respiratory Rate
(breaths/min)

1-3
3-6
6-12
12

70-110
65-110
60-95
55-85

90-105/55-70
95-110/60-75
100-120/60-75
110-135/65-85

20-30
20-25
14-22
12-18

Adapted from Behrman RE et al: Nelson textbook of pediatrics, 19 ed,
Philadelphia, 2011, Elsevier Science.

in a 12-year-old child.14 In contrast, blood pressure rises
rapidly in the first days to weeks (Table 17-1).

Respiratory System
As with the heart, the lungs of a newborn are immature.
Growth in the number of alveoli occurs mainly after birth
and continues to the age of 8 years, whereas the sizes of
alveoli continue to increase until the growth of the chest
wall is complete. As the number of alveoli increase, blood
vessels proliferate in the gas exchange areas, primarily
in the first 5 years of life. The development of alveolar
smooth muscle begins after birth and continues into late
childhood and adolescence. Conditions that disturb the
flow of blood in the lungs, particularly congenital heart
lesions, may disturb normal growth and development of
the pulmonary vasculature.15 A higher metabolic rate is
present in infants and children, resulting in a rate of alveolar ventilation that is two to three times greater than
that in adults. Functional reserve capacity (FRC) is also
significantly smaller in children than in adults. FRC acts
as a buffer to maintain consistent alveolar ventilation during inspiration and expiration. In the adult, the ratio of alveolar ventilation to FRC is 1.5 to 1, whereas in the infant,
it is 5 to 1. Placing a patient in the supine position, as is
commonly done during dental treatment, decreases FRC
by 20% to 30%. One can therefore appreciate why hypoxemia can develop so rapidly in the pediatric dental patient
when normal respiratory function is diminished.16,17
The characteristic anatomic differences of the pediatric airway must also be appreciated. In general, children
have proportionately larger heads and shorter necks. The
larynx is more cephalad and anterior in the child, being
located at the level of C3-4, as compared with C4-5 in the
adult. The relatively narrow nasal passages, large tongues,
and large tonsils and adenoids contribute to the tendency
of the upper airway to be blocked by secretions or edema.
In addition, the relatively vascular and fragile nature of
tonsils adds an additional risk factor in patients with large
tonsils undergoing procedures in the airway, particularly
when the tonsils are inflamed. As a general rule, patients
with tonsillar tissue that occupies more than 50% of the
pharyngeal space are not good candidates for pharmacologic management17 (Fig. 17-3).

Body Size and Composition
Obesity is an important, but often underappreciated,
risk factor for pharmacologic management. According

Figure 17-3 Enlarged tonsils, particularly when inflamed,

increase the risk of airway complications during sedation.
to estimates from the Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention, 1 of 3 children in the United States is obese
or overweight by the time he/she reaches his/her fifth
birthday.18 The risk is increased in children living in lowincome families.19 Obesity affects the delivery of all levels of sedation and anesthesia in many ways. Increased
adiposity may affect the ability of a sedated child to
maintain a patent airway and complicate airway management. Obstructive sleep apnea, which occurs in up to
60% of obese children, may complicate both procedural
sedation and the recovery of patients after sedation.20 Venous access may be more difficult, complicating resuscitation in the event of an emergency. Obesity may affect
the pharmacokinetic properties of certain sedative drugs,
which may distribute preferentially to fatty tissues. Dose
calculations for certain sedative drugs may need to be
adjusted to avoid inadvertent oversedation. Normal vital
signs, such as blood pressure, may be affected.21 Obesity
may also complicate the management of older children,
should rescue or resuscitation be required. Members of
the dental team must be confident that they are capable
of moving and handling an obese child should unconsciousness occur.

ROUTES OF DRUG ADMINISTRATION
Pharmacokinetics is the study of the absorption, distribution, metabolism, and excretion of a drug and its metabolites. This information helps determine how much drug is
made available to the actual site where the drug binds and
takes effect. The route of administration describes where
and how the drug is initially absorbed by the body. A given dose of a drug, administered via different routes, can
have very different effects. For example, the analgesia and
side effects following intravenous administration of meperidine differ dramatically from those seen following oral

Chapter 17

administration.22 This is due primarily to differences in the
pharmacokinetic properties of these two forms of the drug.

Inhalational Route
The inhalational route is a highly effective route of administration, allowing nonirritating gases and volatile drugs
to be inhaled and absorbed directly through the pulmonary epithelium and mucous membranes of the respiratory tract into the circulation. The almost instantaneous
absorption of agents delivered through this route is due to
the large surface area of the lung. Equilibrium is quickly
established among the partial pressure of the drug in the
alveolar gas space, serum, and target tissues in the brain.
As a result, inhaled anesthetic gases are easily titrated by
adjustment of the amount of inhaled gas, provided the
rate and depth of ventilation are adequately controlled.

Enteral Route
Enteral sedation is achieved by drugs that are swallowed
and absorbed through the digestive or enteric system. Although this form of drug delivery is simple and relatively
inexpensive, the effects are not produced as reliably as
those of drugs delivered through parenteral routes—that
is, routes that do not involve the digestive tract. Disadvantages of the oral route include limited absorption of
some drugs due to physiochemical factors, destruction by
digestive enzymes or gastric pH, and metabolism from enzymes in the liver (termed first-pass metabolism).23 Dosing discrepancies may also occur during swallowing by an
uncooperative patient. Once swallowed, medication may
be broken down by gastric enzymes in the stomach; however, no absorption occurs until the drug enters the small
intestine. Differences in drug formulation may result in
some drugs being broken down more completely in the
stomach than others. Because high sympathetic nervous
system tone inhibits gastric emptying time, anxious patients may demonstrate a longer time to the onset of sedation than predicted. Once absorbed in the small intestine,
drugs pass through the hepatic portal system, where they
are metabolized to various degrees by hepatic enzymes.
The amount and activity of hepatic enzymes vary significantly among patients, with as much as an eightfold difference noted among populations of normal individuals.
This effect, known as the first-pass effect, may account for
large discrepancies between the amount of drug present
in the initial drug formulation and the amount of drug
that remains active after first-pass metabolism (Fig. 17-4,
A). The onset, peak, and duration of drug effects may still
be affected by numerous factors once they bind to their
effect site in the brain; however, as a general rule, most
clinically useful agents will display an onset approximately 30 minutes after administration, with peak effect noted
by 60 minutes. The duration of effect is usually proportional to the elimination half-life of the drug.
Although the enteral route of administration is better
accepted by pediatric patients over injections, not all patients will readily accept orally administered drugs. The
taste may be quite objectionable, especially to very young
children. This can usually be overcome when the drug is
mixed with a palatable liquid (e.g., flavoring drops). The
use of a syringe to deliver oral medication to uncooperative

n

Pharmacologic Management of Patient Behavior

307

children is sometimes used, but caution must be exercised
with this technique to avoid inadvertent aspiration of the
drug.24 Enteral drugs should only be administered to patients while under supervision by trained personnel. The
practice of having parents administer oral medications to
children prior to arrival at the office should be avoided.25

Intramuscular Route
Intramuscular administration relies upon the high vascularity of muscle tissue to achieve a moderately rapid
onset of action, usually within 5 to 10 minutes. When
properly administered, intramuscular injection provides
a more rapid onset and offset as compared with enteral
techniques (see Fig. 17-4, B). As with enteral techniques,
practitioners are limited to a single dose of medication;
however, the onset of sedation is more predictable than is
the onset of oral techniques. For pediatric dental sedation,
injections are typically performed in the vastus lateralis or
deltoid muscle. Aqueous solutions are well absorbed following intramuscular injection. Care should be taken to
prepare the solution in a volume that is appropriate for the
size of the injected muscle because excessive volume may
cause pain and/or tissue damage and hinder absorption.
The most common error in the delivery of intramuscular
injections is failure of the injected solution to be deposited deep in the muscle bed, where maximum absorption
can take effect. Misplaced or superficial injections result
in deposition of the solution in fascia or subcutaneous tissue, resulting in slower, less predictable onset.
As with local anesthetic techniques, knowledge of the
anatomy of the injection site is mandatory for safe and effective delivery. The vastus lateralis muscle on the ventral
thigh is often preferred due to its larger size and relative
easy access in small children. The upper outer quadrant
of the gluteus maximus muscle and the middle of the deltoid muscle are other acceptable sites as long as muscle
development is adequate. Once the medication has been
injected, if the desired effect is not achieved within 25 to
30 minutes, termination should be considered. As with
oral agents, additional intramuscular injections are not
advisable, and may create unintended sequelae for a prolonged period of time.

Submucosal and Subcutaneous Routes
Submucosal sedation involves the deposition of the drug
beneath the oral mucosa. Its use is almost exclusively the
province of dentistry. It is analogous to subcutaneous injection, with the solution being deposited below the intraoral mucosa. From a pharmacologic perspective, there
is little advantage of the submucosal route over the subcutaneous route. From a practical perspective, it is often
harder to administer a well-controlled intraoral injection
as opposed to an intramuscular injection. Details of this
technique may be found in earlier editions of this text.

Intravenous Route
The intravenous route of administration shares most of
the desirable pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic
features of inhalational anesthetics. Drugs delivered
through the intravenous route circulate directly to the
brain, with onset occurring within 20 to 40 seconds. The

308

Chapter 17

n

Pharmacologic Management of Patient Behavior

Enteric drug absorption

15-40 minutes

Intramuscular drug absorption

Rapid feed from muscle tissue
2-10 minutes
Intravenous drug absorption

20 seconds from vein to brain

Figure 17-4 Comparison of drug absorption and distribution to the brain through the enteral, intramuscular, and intravenous

routes.

level of sedation or anesthesia is readily titrated and can
be sustained for extended periods of time. Recovery from
intravenously administered drugs is often more rapid than
that from drugs delivered through the oral or intramuscular route. Multiple doses can be administered through
an intravenous infusion, with a high degree of versatility
and control. The intravenous route also requires the most
training and experience to perform because drug-related
complications often arise very rapidly, with increased potential for severe consequences.
Despite the clear advantages of the intravenous
route of administration, it is often difficult to achieve

sustained moderate sedation through the intravenous
route in the pediatric patient. The reasons for this have
less to do with the route of administration and more to
do with how easy it is to achieve a state of general anesthesia when attempting to provide moderate sedation
to children during dental procedures. Advanced training for intravenous and other parenteral administration
techniques is required.3 Dentists with limited parenteral
moderate sedation permits will often find this modality best suited to older children and adolescents for a
combination of behavioral, pharmacologic, and practical reasons.

Chapter 17

Rectal Route
Rectal administration of sedative drugs with suppositories
has a limited history in pediatric dentistry. Drugs administered through this route are absorbed through two different vascular systems, one of which delivers agents to the
liver while the second bypasses the liver. As a result, wide
variations of bioavailability are seen after rectal administration. References report that 50% of a drug delivered
by the rectal route undergoes first-pass metabolism in the
liver, but this is a broad approximation, and absorption
is often irregular and incomplete. For this reason, and
because of the tendency toward mucosal irritation from
drugs delivered via this route, rectal administration is not
recommended for pediatric sedation.26

DRUGS AND AGENTS USED FOR SEDATION
NITROUS OXIDE
Eighty-five percent of pediatric dentists use inhalation of
nitrous oxide and oxygen to sedate patients, making it
the most frequently used pediatric sedation technique today. Nitrous oxide is a slightly sweet-smelling, colorless,
inert gas. It is compressed in cylinders as a liquid that
vaporizes on release. The gas is nonflammable but will
support combustion.
The pharmacokinetic properties of nitrous oxide are
well suited to producing moderate sedation. The small
molecular size and low solubility allow for rapid alveolar
uptake and distribution through the arterial circulation
to the brain. Within 3 to 5 minutes of the patient inhaling a fixed concentration of nitrous oxide, equilibrium
is reached among the concentrations in the alveolar gas,
blood, and target sites in the brain. There is good correlation between the mixture set with the flowmeter and the
observed effect. The nitrous oxide machine feeds a steady,
consistent mixture, making it relatively easy for the dentist to achieve a steady state of moderate sedation in a
patient whose rate and depth of breathing and level of
procedural stimulation remain reasonably constant consistently. The lack of significant biotransformation in the
liver or other sites allows for an equally rapid recovery.
Excretion occurs almost entirely through the lungs; only
very small amounts may be excreted in body fluids and
intestinal gas.
The mechanism through which nitrous oxide produces
its clinical effects remains undefined. Current evidence suggests an interaction with the endogenous opioid system,
because its effects are abolished by the administration of
the opioid antagonist, naloxone. The strongest evidence
suggests that nitrous oxide stimulates the release of enkephalins, which trigger descending noradrenergic pathways.
The most common estimate of analgesic efficacy suggests
that 30% nitrous oxide delivered by full mask is equivalent
to 10 to 15 mg of morphine. This interaction with the endogenous opioid system may account, in part, for the abuse
potential that has been attributed to nitrous oxide.
Nitrous oxide is the weakest of all inhalational agents,
with a minimum alveolar concentration (MAC) of 105.
The MAC of an inhalational agent is a measure of its anesthetic potency; it is defined as the concentration required
to produce immobility in 50% of patients upon surgical

n

Pharmacologic Management of Patient Behavior

309

Table 17-2
MAC Values for Common Inhaled Anesthetics
Minimum Alveolar Concentration
(MAC)

%

Nitrous oxide
Desflurane
Sevoflurane
Isoflurane
Halothane

104
6.0
2.0
1.2
0.75

Adapted from Nickalls RW, Mapleson WW: Age-related iso-MAC
charts for isoflurane, sevoflurane and desoflurane in man, Br J Anaesth
31:170-174, 2003.

skin incision. Most commonly used inhalational general
anesthetics today have MAC values between 1% and 6%
(Table 17-2). The exceedingly high MAC value of nitrous
oxide precludes the use of an inhalational agent as the
sole means of producing general anesthesia; however, it
possesses very useful clinical effects when delivered at
subanesthetic concentrations far below MAC value.
A nitrous oxide concentration between 30% and 50%
(roughly 0.3 to 0.5 MAC) will produce a relaxed, somnolent, and sometimes euphoric patient who may appear
dissociated and easily susceptible to suggestion. Amnesia
may occur in some patients, but there is little alteration
of learning or memory. The concentration of nitrous oxide should not routinely exceed 50% in clinical dental
practice because concentrations in this range increase the
likelihood of nausea, vomiting, and disorientation. At
concentrations greater than 60%, patients may experience
ataxia, giddiness, dysphoria, and increased sleepiness. Like
all inhaled agents, nitrous oxide can be titrated, allowing
the doctor to adjust the level of sedation to match the level of surgical stimulation.
Nitrous oxide reduces the ventilatory response to hypoxemia but has minimal effect on the hypercapnic respiratory drive when delivered in concentrations less than
50%. It should be avoided, however, in patients who rely
significantly on hypoxia-driven ventilation. When combined with other agents that depress respiration, nitrous
oxide may diminish the body’s normal response to low
oxygen tension. These effects are usually negligible, however, because of the high concentration of oxygen administered in combination with nitrous oxide. Nitrous oxide
slightly increases the respiratory minute volume. As the
patient becomes more relaxed from the effects of nitrous
oxide, the respiratory rate may decrease slightly. The gas
is nonirritating to the respiratory tract and can be given
to patients with asthma without fear of bronchospasm.
Caution must be exercised when nitrous oxide is used
with central nervous system depressants because it may
enhance those actions.
Nitrous oxide–oxygen has an excellent safety record
with few adverse effects. Nausea and vomiting are the
most common adverse effects, occurring in 1% to 10%
of patients. The incidence of adverse effects increases
with concentrations in excess of 50%, rapid fluctuations

310

Chapter 17

n

Pharmacologic Management of Patient Behavior

of concentrations, and rapid induction and reversal. The
likelihood of nausea and vomiting also increases with the
length of the procedures, beginning at durations of approximately 20 minutes. Fasting is not required for nitrous oxide–oxygen sedation.
Nitrous oxide will become entrapped in gas-filled
spaces such as the middle ear, sinuses, and gastrointestinal tract. Middle ear pressure will increase significantly, and although it is of little significance in a patient
with normal patency of Eustachian tubes, it can induce
pain in patients with acute otitis media and should be
avoided. Other contraindications include severe behavioral problems and emotional illness, uncooperativeness,
claustrophobia, maxillofacial deformities that prevent
nasal hood placement, nasal obstruction (e.g., upper
respiratory infection, nasal polyps, deviated septum),
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, pregnancy, and
situations in which high oxygenation is inadvisable (e.g.,
bleomycin therapy).
When medical-quality nitrous oxide and oxygen are
used properly, there is little to no risk of toxicity for the
dental patient. The greatest concern regarding toxicity centers on the exposure of dental personnel to high
ambient air levels of the gas when it is used for patient
sedation. Chronic exposure to nitrous oxide, including
recreational abuse, can produce neurotoxicity, sexual
and reproductive problems, hepatotoxicity, and renal
dysfunction. The rate of spontaneous abortion is known
to be higher in operating room personnel and in the
spouses of operating room personnel. In addition, individuals exposed over the long term may experience a
decrease in fertility. An increase in hepatic disease was
found in dentists and dental personnel exposed to high
levels of nitrous oxide for periods longer than 3 hours
per week.27 In light of these findings, leakage from open
nitrous oxide delivery systems, such as those used in the
dental office, should be reduced as much as possible. This
can be accomplished by limiting the amount of mouth
breathing by the patient and the use of an efficient scavenging system. The office location as well as office personnel should be periodically monitored for exposure to
ambient nitrous oxide. Numerous units are available that
use infrared spectrophotometry to measure levels of unscavenged nitrous oxide in the dental operatory environment. These machines can detect levels as low as 1 ppm
and are particularly useful for uncovering leaks around
tanks and flowmeters. A less costly and more practical approach is the use of dosimetry badges that are worn by office personnel when using nitrous oxide. These units are
generally worn for an 8-hour period and report exposure
as time-weighted averages. Methods to limit exposure to
ambient nitrous oxide are listed in Box 17-1.

ANTIHISTAMINES
Hydroxyzine (Atarax, Vistaril)
Hydroxyzine is an antihistamine with weak sedative,
anticholinergic, and antiemetic properties. It produces
sedation by inhibiting the hypothalamic H-1 histamine
receptors involved in governing the sleep-wake cycle in
humans.28 The antimuscarinic action of hydroxyzine inhibits the flow of saliva, resulting in various degrees of

Box 17-1
Recommendations for Minimizing
Occupational Exposure to N2O
•	Use scavenging systems that remove N2O during patient’s exhalation.
•	Ensure that exhaust systems adequately vent scavenged
air and gases to the outside of the building and away
from fresh air intake vents.
•	Where possible, use outdoor air for dental operatory
ventilation.
•	Implement careful, regular inspection and maintenance
of the nitrous oxide/oxygen delivery equipment.
•	Carefully consider patient selection criteria (i.e., indications and contraindications) prior to administering
N2O.
•	Select a properly fitted mask size for each patient.
•	During administration, visually monitor the patient and
titrate the flow/percentage to the minimal effective
dose of N2O.
•	
Encourage patients to minimize talking and mouth
breathing during N2O administration.
•	
Use rubber dam and high-volume dental evacuator
when possible during N2O administration.
•	Administer 100% oxygen to the patient for at least 5
minutes after terminating nitrous oxide use, to replace the
N2O in the gas delivery system.
Data from the American Academy of Pediatric Dentistry Policy on Minimizing
Occupational Health Hazards Associated with Nitrous Oxide Reference
Manual, 35(6):13-14, www.aapd.org/media/Policies_Guidelines/G_
Nitrous.pdf.

xerostomia. Although clinical anxiolysis is sometimes reported with hydroxyzine, this effect is most likely related
to the production of drowsiness and is not linked to specific actions on the neural substrates involved in anxiety.
In normal doses, it has no cardiovascular or respiratory
depressant effects. Absorption through the gastrointestinal tract is relatively rapid, with the onset of action occurring in 15 to 30 minutes. Peak levels occur at 2 hours.
Recovery is slow by modern standards, reflected by the
mean half-life of 3 hours. It is available in two forms,
hydroxyzine hydrochloride (Atarax) and hydroxyzine
pamoate (Vistaril).
Preparation: tablets, elixir
Dosage: 0.5 to 1.0 mg/kg
Side effects: prolonged drowsiness, ataxia, dry mouth. In
children, paradoxical reactions may occur at sedative doses.

Promethazine (Phenergan)
Although promethazine is classified here as an antihistamine, it is primarily classified as a phenothiazine, a group
of drugs characterized by a wide range of clinical effects.
Phenothiazines bind to a variety of receptors in the central
nervous system, including histaminic, alpha adrenergic,
muscarinic, serotonergic, and dopaminergic receptors.29
As a class, phenothiazines are most commonly used as
antipsychotics, antiemetics, and sedatives. Promethazine
lacks antipsychotic effects, but has strong anticholinergic,

Chapter 17

antiemetic, and antihistaminic effects. It has been used
in clinical practice in the United States since 1946, most
commonly as an antiemetic and sedative agent. It continues to be used as a sedative in pediatric dentistry, although
its use has been supplanted by newer sedative agents with
better pharmacokinetic properties.
Like hydroxyzine, promethazine is readily absorbed
by the GI tract, with onset of action noted at 20 minutes
and peak effect occurring within 2 to 3 hours.30 It is highly
bound to plasma proteins and has a serum half-life of 7 to
14 hours.31 The long half-life may be seen as beneficial in
terms of its antiemetic effects but may also contribute to
prolonged drowsiness, particularly when used in combination with other sedative drugs. Promethazine is rapidly
degraded by first-pass metabolism, resulting in limited bioavailability after oral or rectal administration. Promethazine
has been associated with an enhanced risk of sudden infant
death syndrome (SIDS) and worsening of sleep apnea. Although the mechanisms remain unclear, relaxation of the
oral pharyngeal musculature may be a contributing factor
in patients with compromised airways or a history of SIDS.32
Preparation: tablets, rectal suppository
Dosage: 0.5 to 1 mg/kg to a maximum single dose of
50 mg
Side effects: blurred vision, prolonged drowsiness, ataxia

Diphenhydramine (Benadryl)
Along with hydroxyzine, diphenhydramine is the most
commonly used antihistamine for procedural sedation
and antiemetic therapy in children. When compared with
other antihistamines, diphenhydramine is noted for its
pronounced tendency to produce sedation and its strong
antimuscarinic effects. It is approved by the Food and
Drug Administration (FDA) for over-the-counter use as a
sleep aid and therapeutic for motion sickness. It is well
absorbed through the gastrointestinal tract but undergoes
significant first-pass metabolism in the liver, resulting in
a bioavailability of 40% to 60%. The peak clinical effect
occurs at approximately 1 hour. The half-life of diphenhydramine ranges from 2 to 8 hours. It is metabolized by
the liver and is completely excreted in 24 hours.
Preparation: tablets, elixir, capsules, injectable
Dosage: oral, intramuscular, or intravenous—1.0 to 1.5
mg/kg; maximum single dose is 50 mg

BENZODIAZEPINE AGONISTS
AND ANTAGONISTS
Benzodiazepines are the most commonly used drugs for
procedural sedation in medicine and dentistry today. The
popularity of this class of drugs is due to its wide therapeutic index, shallow dose-response curve, and its specific
effects on the GABAnergic neurons of the central nervous
system. GABA is the major inhibitory neurotransmitter
in the brain, and GABA receptors are found in high concentrations in the cerebral cortex, midbrain, hippocampus, and other sites involved in the neural processing of
awareness, anxiety, and learning.33
Benzodiazepines have five major clinical effects: anxiolysis, hypnosis, amnesia, muscle relaxation, and anticonvulsant activity.34 Each of the clinically available
benzodiazepine drugs is characterized by the relative
­

n

Pharmacologic Management of Patient Behavior

311

­degree to which it produces each of these five major effects. Despite having marked effects on awareness and
memory, benzodiazepines have negligible effects on cardiovascular or respiratory function when used as single
agents. Members of this class of drugs also lack analgesic
activity, although they are believed to play a role in the
prevention of hyperalgesia from surgical trauma.

Diazepam (Valium)
Introduced in 1963, diazepam is the oldest benzodiazepine in use for clinical sedation and is often considered
the standard with which all other benzodiazepines are
compared. It is rapidly absorbed from the GI tract, reaching peak serum levels in as little as 15 to 30 minutes in
children. Due to its high lipid solubility, diazepam redistributes rapidly to other tissues. It is metabolized into two
principal metabolites, desmethyldiazepam and oxazepam.
Desmethyldiazepam is only slightly less potent than its
parent compound diazepam and is believed to be the chief
cause of secondary drowsiness, or resedation, which may
happen hours after the initial dose. Enterohepatic recirculation also contributes to the long elimination half-life
of this drug, which ranges from 21 to 37 hours.35 When
compared with newer, more potent benzodiazepines, diazepam is distinguished by its ability to produce rapid and
sustained anxiolysis. The prolonged recovery period poses
a potential for resedation and airway obstruction in the
postprocedural phases of treatment, especially in obese
children and in cases where opioid agents had been coadministered during the procedure. Side effects most commonly include ataxia and prolonged sedation.
Dosage: oral—0.2 to 0.5 mg/kg to a maximum single
dose of 10 mg; intravenous—0.25 mg/kg
Supplied: tablets—2, 5, and 10 mg; suspension—5 mg/
mL

Midazolam (Versed)
Midazolam was introduced into U.S. medical and dental
practice in 1985 as the first water-soluble benzodiazepine.
This property accounts for its stability in aqueous solutions, making it nonirritating to tissues following intravenous or intramuscular administration. When administered
orally, it undergoes rapid absorption, but from 50% to 65%
of the dose is lost to first-pass metabolism. The onset of
sedation occurs within 20 to 30 minutes, allowing an average of 30 minutes of working time for the dentist. After
binding to receptor sites in the brain, the drug is rapidly
redistributed to other tissues or metabolized. Although biotransformation of midazolam in the liver produces one active metabolite, it is of negligible clinical importance. The
elimination half-time of midazolam is 1 to 4 hours, which
is significantly shorter than that of diazepam. Cognitive
testing in adults shows return of normal mental function
within 4 hours.36
Midazolam is much more potent than diazepam, as predicted by its greater affinity to bind benzodiazepine receptors in the brain.37 The clinical potency of midazolam is
estimated to be 2 to 5 times the potency of diazepam. Part
of the reason for this discrepancy is the difference in doseresponse relationships of the two drugs. Diazepam is characterized by a more gradual increase in effects with dose,

312

Chapter 17

n

Pharmacologic Management of Patient Behavior

whereas midazolam shows greater potency with increasing
dose.38 This difference in potency was not fully appreciated
in the late 1980s, when midazolam was first introduced and
commercially prepared in the same concentrations as diazepam. Early reports of hypoxia associated with midazolam
were almost entirely due to lack of appreciation for the difference in potency between the two drugs.39 This difference
may also explain the differences in cognitive effects seen
when midazolam and diazepam are compared. Midazolam
produces more consistent anterograde amnesia during
moderate sedation than does diazepam, whereas diazepam
is more likely to produce anxiolysis with less amnesia. Both
effects are dose-dependent, and precise ranges for enteral
sedation techniques are difficult to define, because nearly
all clinical examinations of these effects were performed
with intravenous or intramuscular administration.40,41 It
is worth noting that amnesia may not be desirable for all
types of sedation in pediatric practice. Older children and
adolescents with a desire to cooperate may tolerate procedures better with anxiolysis as compared with deeper levels
of sedation and accompanying amnesia.
Midazolam is available as a premixed suspension;
however, independent studies have reported superior bioavailability, shorter onset, and better sedation scores with
a mixture of a standard parenteral midazolam preparation
with Syrpalta®, a commercial syrup.42,43
Preparation: syrup, parenteral injection solution
Dosage: oral—0.25 to 1.0 mg/kg to a maximum single
dose of 20 mg; intramuscular—0.1 to 0.15 mg/kg to a
maximum dose of 10 mg

Flumazenil (Romazicon)
Flumazenil is a direct, specific reversal agent used in clinical
practice to treat benzodiazepine overdose. Pharmacologically it acts as a competitive antagonist at the benzodiazepine receptor sites in the central nervous system. In selected
situations the drug is capable of rescuing patients from the
effects of benzodiazepine overdose. It is included by several
state boards, institutions, and organizations as a required
drug when sedation with benzodiazepines is performed.
Unfortunately, the use of this drug has been misinterpreted,
leading to practices that undermine its intended purpose
and effective use in an emergency.
Flumazenil is approved by FDA for intravenous administration. Effective and safe reversal in adults is achieved
by titration, by the injection of 0.2-mg doses every 3 to 5
minutes up to a total dosage of 1 mg. When an adequate
dose is achieved, reversal of effects occurs within 2 minutes; however, the duration of reversal is short, lasting
only 20 to 45 minutes. The manufacturer states that “conscious sedation is reversed in most patients with cumulative doses between 0.6 mg and 1.0 mg. For children, an
initial intravenous dose of 0.01 mg/kg (maximum dose:
0.2 mg) given over 15 seconds is recommended, with repeat 0.01 mg/kg (maximum dose: 0.2 mg) after 45 seconds,
and then every minute to a maximum total cumulative
dose of 0.05 mg/kg or 1 mg, whichever is lower; usual
total dose: 0.08 to 1 mg (mean: 0.65 mg).”
Alternate routes of administration via intraoral submucosal injection in the sublingual area have been
­described; however, the onset of action is slower, and

accurate titration is not possible outside of the intravenous route.44 Practitioners using this route must estimate
the appropriate dose or use the recommended starting
dose for a single injection. Furthermore, there is no support
for the practice of routinely administering flumazenil at
the end of sedation in an attempt to accelerate recovery.
In a study of adults undergoing moderate sedation with
benzodiazepines, Hosaka et al. found that a single dose of
0.2-mg flumazenil was inadequate to reverse the effects of
a typical enteral sedation with triazolam. They concluded
that reversal for the purpose of discharging the patient
early is neither appropriate nor safe.45
A more insidious issue with flumazenil is a misunderstanding of its role in sedation emergencies. Respiratory
events account for the greatest share of sedation-related
morbidity and mortality. Sedation with a benzodiazepine is
a common practice in children, and one may be led to believe that the administration of flumazenil is an appropriate
first step for the management of hypoventilation or apnea
during benzodiazepine sedation. Proper and effective airway
management is always the first step undertaken when respiratory distress is encountered. Delaying airway management
for the purpose of administering flumazenil may cause delays resulting in hypoxia, serious morbidity, or death.
Dosage: intravenous—as described
Supplied: 5- and 10-mL multiple-use vials containing
0.1 mg/mL in boxes of 10

OPIOID AGONISTS AND ANTAGONISTS
Opioids are drugs that bind to receptors in the endogenous
opioid system (EOS), a collection of neurons with diverse
connections throughout the central and peripheral nervous system. Although EOS is most commonly appreciated
for its ability to diminish or block the sensation of painful
sensory stimulation, it is also involved in numerous homeostatic functions, such as breathing, digestion, movement control, airway reflexes, and modulation of the stress
response. Opioids are most useful during moderate sedation for their ability to suppress the cough reflex, provide
analgesia, and produce a sensation of well-being; however,
direct scientific evidence for their utilization in pediatric
dental sedation is extremely limited. They are also closely
linked with several important side effects, including respiratory depression, nausea and vomiting, delayed gastric
emptying, constipation and urinary retention, and itching.
Opioids differ from the benzodiazepines in several
critical ways that are relevant to the clinician seeking to
provide moderate sedation. They produce analgesia by
raising the threshold for perceiving painful stimulation,
whereas benzodiazepines have no significant effect on
pain perception. At sedative doses, opioids produce analgesia while not affecting awareness and memory, whereas
benzodiazepines produce profound, dose-dependent amnesia. All opioid agonists produce dose-dependent respiratory depression through direct action on the ventilatory
control center in the medulla and blunt the response to
hypercarbia and hypoxia. The effects of opioids on the
response to hypercarbia are particularly relevant to clinical sedation because they raise the apneic threshold, i.e.,
the point at which patients stop breathing (Fig. 17-5).
Under these conditions, the accumulation of carbon

Chapter 17

Minute ventilation (L/min)

25

Normal

Opioids

20
15
10
5
0

10

20

30
40
PaCO2 (mmHg)

50

60

Figure 17-5 The effects of opioids on the ventilatory response

to hypercarbia.

dioxide secondary to airway obstruction may not increase
the rate of ventilation, leading to acute hypoxia. Because
the rate and depth of ventilation may already be reduced
during sedation, changes in breathing may be subtle.
Continuous and careful observation of the rate and depth
of breathing should accompany the use of any opioid.
Opioids also induce nausea and vomiting through
direct action on the chemoreceptor trigger zone in the
medulla. In comparison, benzodiazepines do not depress
ventilation at sedative doses and are not associated with
the production of nausea and vomiting. Tolerance, dependence, and abuse potential are associated with repeated dosing of both agents. While these phenomena are
not generally induced by a single exposure of the patient
to these drugs during a sedative procedure, practitioners
may find patients under therapy with these drugs to be refractory to moderate sedation. Although most opioids are
readily absorbed through the gastrointestinal (GI) tract,
bioavailability is limited by significant first-pass metabolism. In general, the parenteral administration of opioids
is more effective and reliable than oral administration.
For the purposes of this chapter, discussion will be limited to fentanyl, meperidine, and naloxone.

Fentanyl (Sublimaze)
Fentanyl is a potent synthetic opiate agonist. A dose of 0.1
mg is approximately equivalent to 10 mg of morphine or 75
mg of meperidine. Fentanyl acts rapidly, and after intramuscular injection the onset occurs in 7 to 15 minutes; duration
of effects is 1 to 2 hours. The drug is metabolized by the liver
and is excreted in the urine. Fentanyl produces little histamine release and has a much lower emetic effect than does
morphine or meperidine. Fentanyl can be administered by
the intramuscular, intravenous, or submucosal route.
Supplied: 0.05 mg/mL in 2- and 5-mL ampules
Dosage: 0.002 to 0.004 mg/kg

Meperidine (Demerol)
Meperidine is a synthetic opiate agonist, closely related to
fentanyl in chemical structure. It is water-soluble but is incompatible with many other drugs in solution. Meperidine
may be administered through either enteral or parenteral

n

Pharmacologic Management of Patient Behavior

313

administration; however, oral administration is only about
half as effective as intramuscular injection. It is rapidly
and well absorbed from the GI tract, reaching peak effect
in about 60 minutes. Approximately 90% of an oral dose
undergoes biotransformation via first-pass metabolism to
normeperidine and meperidinic acid. Normeperidine is
an active metabolite with approximately 50% of the analgesic activity as the parent compound, and manifests an
elimination half-life of 15 to 40 hours. Normeperidine also
possesses CNS stimulation and can become proconvulsant
with prolonged accumulation of the metabolite. Its use is
contraindicated in patients with a history of hepatic disease, renal disease or dysfunction, or seizure disorders.
Supplied: oral tablets—50 and 100 mg; oral syrup—50
mg/5 mL; parenteral solution—25, 50, 75, and 100 mg/mL
Dosage: oral, subcutaneous, or intramuscular—1.0 to
2.2 mg/kg, not to exceed 100 mg when given alone or
50 mg when in combination with other CNS depressants

Naloxone (Narcan)
A semisynthetic opioid receptor antagonist used to reverse
the effects of opioid drug overdose, naloxone is a pure
antagonist, with no intrinsic agonist activity. Following
subcutaneous or intramuscular injection, reversal begins
within 2 to 5 minutes, as compared with 30 seconds to
2 minutes following intravenous administration. Reversal persists for approximately 45 minutes via either route.
Excessive or too rapid reversal may result in adverse reactions including nausea, vomiting, sweating, hypotension,
hypertension, ventricular tachycardia and fibrillation, and
pulmonary edema. Therefore naloxone should be titrated
judiciously, with the intravenous route used whenever possible. As with benzodiazepine reversal discussed earlier, the
administration of naloxone should never take precedence
over basic airway management and resuscitative measures.
Dosage: intravenous, subcutaneous, intramuscular—
initial dose: 0.01 mg/kg; subsequent doses: 0.1 mg/kg (2
mg maximum) every 2 to 3 minutes
Supplied: parenteral solution—0.02, 0.4, 1.0 mg/kg

OTHER SEDATIVE-HYPNOTICS
Prior to the modern era, many drugs with nonspecific
mechanisms of action were introduced into clinical medical and dental practice for the purpose of producing sleep
or sedation. These include paraldehyde, chloral hydrate,
ethchlorvynol, meprobamate, and others. The effects of
all of these drugs resemble those of barbiturate drugs, in
that they produce profound hypnosis with little or no effect upon pain perception. Like barbiturates, they are characterized by a limited therapeutic window and possess a
significant risk of respiratory depression and other toxic effects when doses exceed clinically accepted ranges. The last
of these agents to be used routinely in clinical practice was
chloral hydrate, which was used by many pediatric dentists
until it was discontinued in 2012. The discussion of these
agents in this chapter will be limited to chloral hydrate.

Chloral Hydrate
Chloral hydrate is an aldehyde compound that is metabolized by alcohol dehydrogenase in the liver to its active
metabolite, trichloroethanol. In vitro studies have suggested

314

Chapter 17

n

Pharmacologic Management of Patient Behavior

that trichloroethanol acts upon GABA receptors in a manner similar to barbiturates and benzodiazepines.46 It is a
chemical irritant to the skin and mucous membranes and
is associated with a high rate of nausea and vomiting,
particularly when administered on an empty stomach.
After oral administration, the drug was characterized by
a slow onset time (30 to 60 minutes) and had a duration
of action of 4 to 8 hours, with an elimination half-life of
8 to 11 hours.
Children given chloral hydrate would often enter a period of disinhibition resulting in excitement and irritability before reaching a level of clinically useful sedation.
Large doses sensitize the myocardium to the effects of epinephrine, resulting in arrhythmias.47,48 The lethal dose of
chloral hydrate is stated to be 10 g in adults, yet ingestion
of 4 g has been associated with a fatal outcome.49
Chloral hydrate is no longer available commercially in
the United States, but is included here because of its history in pediatric dentistry and references in the pediatric
dentistry literature.

below 30%. If systems are used that allow more than 70%
nitrous oxide and less than 30% oxygen, an inline oxygen
analyzer must be used. An acceptable scavenging system
must be demonstrated to minimize the risk of occupational exposure and room contamination.27 The double-mask
type is the most efficient type of scavenger51 (Fig. 17-6).
These systems send exhaust into the vacuum waste system, which should be vented to the outside to prevent dispersal of gases to other areas of the office or building. Nasal
hoods should be of good design and should be available
in pediatric and adult sizes to ensure adequate fit, which
further reduces leakage.
An additional safety feature for all nitrous oxide systems, mobile or fixed, is the pin-index yoke system. Gas
tanks will align only at right angles, and produce a normal coupling when gas-specific pins are properly aligned
(Fig. 17-7). Although it seems highly unlikely that gas tanks
could be mistakenly attached to the wrong line with a pinindex system in place, such errors have occurred. Gas tank
crossover errors are more likely to occur when office renovations are done and when fittings wear with age and use.

NITROUS OXIDE ADMINISTRATION

TECHNIQUE

OBJECTIVES

After a thorough inspection of the equipment, the mask
should be introduced to the patient with an explanation delivered at the appropriate level of understanding,
and then the mask should be carefully placed over the
patient’s nose. Traditional behavior guidance techniques
should be used because the effectiveness of nitrous oxide–oxygen sedation is closely linked to psychological
reassurance. The delivery tubes are tightened behind the
chair back with the patient in a comfortable position. The
bag is filled with 100% oxygen and delivered to the patient for 1 or 2 minutes at an appropriate flow rate, typically between 4 and 6 L/min. With an appropriate flow
rate, movement covering one quarter to one half of the
breathing bag should be observed with each inhalation
and exhalation. With too high a flow rate, the bag will
be overinflated, movement will not be seen with each
breath, and leakage will occur from around the mask. In
this instance, the flow rate should be adjusted downward.
Too low a flow rate will deplete the bag of mixed gases.
Once the proper flow rate is achieved, the nitrous oxide
can be introduced by slowly increasing the concentration
in increments of 10% to 20% until the desired level is
achieved.
The dentist should encourage the patient to breathe
through the nose with the mouth closed. It is helpful to
explain the sensations as the patient begins to experience the effects of the gas. Effects are often described as
a floating, giddy feeling with tingling of fingers and toes.
The appearance of ptosis (sagging of the eyelids) is used
by many as an objective marker of when local anesthetic should be administered. Once this is completed, the
concentration can be reduced to approximately 30% nitrous oxide/70% oxygen or lower. The level of moderate
sedation can then be maintained throughout the procedures with minor adjustments of the oxygen and nitrous
gas proportion. The dentist and staff should communicate with the patient throughout the procedure, paying
particular attention to the rate and depth of breathing.

The objectives of nitrous oxide sedation, as stated by the
American Academy of Pediatric Dentistry,50 include the
following:
  
•	Reducing or eliminating anxiety
•	Reducing untoward movement and reaction to
dental treatment
•	Enhancing communication and patient cooperation
•	Raising the pain threshold
•	Increasing tolerance for longer appointments
•	Aiding in the treatment of a patient with mental
and/or physical disabilities or a medically compromised patient
•	Reducing gagging
•	Potentiating the effects of sedatives
Disadvantages of nitrous oxide–oxygen inhalation may
include:
•	Lack of potency
•	Dependence on psychological reassurance
•	Interference of the nasal hood with injection to
the anterior maxillary region
•	Need for the patient to be able to breathe through
the nose
•	Nitrous oxide pollution and potential occupational
exposure health hazards

EQUIPMENT
Several manufacturers produce machines for the safe delivery of nitrous oxide–oxygen sedation in the dental office.
All newly installed facilities that include nitrous oxide–
oxygen delivery systems must be inspected for proper gas
delivery and intact safety features prior to use. Acceptable
machines must possess a high-flow oxygen flush valve and
be capable of delivering 100% oxygen at a flow rate appropriate for pediatric emergency management. Fail-safe
mechanisms include nitrous oxide–oxygen proportioning
systems that do not allow oxygen concentrations to drop

Chapter 17

A

B

n

Pharmacologic Management of Patient Behavior

C

Atmospheric air inlet
Opens only when
breathing bag is empty

Inhalation

315

To vacuum

Exhaled gases

Exhalation

To vacuum

Anesthetic
gases

D
Figure 17-6 Example of a double-mask scavenger breathing circuit. A shows the “mask within a mask design,” whereas B
through D show the combination of fresh inhalation and exhalation lines within the mask. (Photos courtesy of Porter Instrument Co., Hatfield, Pennsylvania, United States.)

This should be recorded for future reference. An emesis
basin should be readily available; if vomiting does occur,
the patient’s head should be rotated to the side. However,
the laryngeal reflex is not obtunded with nitrous oxide
when used at proper concentrations, so aspiration of
vomitus is unlikely.52
Recovery can be achieved quickly by reverse titration.
Once the flow of nitrous oxide is reduced to zero, the patient should be allowed to breathe 100% oxygen for 3 to
5 minutes. The patient should be allowed to remain in
the sitting position for a brief period to ensure against
dizziness upon standing. The patient is then ready for discharge.
Diffusion hypoxia refers to conditions in which inhalation of high concentrations of nitrous oxide is abruptly
discontinued, resulting in the quick reversal of the nitrous oxide concentration gradient between the gases in
the lung and alveolar circulation. Under these conditions,
nitrous oxide rapidly dilutes the oxygen in the alveoli,
creating the conditions for hypoxemia. Many dentists
provide the patient with 100% oxygen during the first
few minutes following discontinuation of nitrous oxide
to counteract the development of hypoxemia; however,
this concern may be more theoretical than clinical. Studies have shown that hypoxemia is significant for only a
few minutes and has been documented only when high
concentrations (>70%) have been delivered by full mask

or by endotracheal tube. These conditions cannot be met
with the use of conventional dental nitrous oxide machines with nasal masks, and any tendency for diffusion
hypoxia in the dental setting is likely to be trivial.
One must be cautious when attempting to extrapolate concentrations quoted from the anesthesia literature
on nitrous oxide delivered through a full face mask or
endotracheal tube and applying them to a dental office
setting. The typical dental unit is constructed very differently from standard anesthesia machines. Loosely fitting
nasal hood masks, dead space in large-bore tubing, and
escape of nitrous oxide through the mouth of a spontaneously breathing patient dilute the intended concentration
of nitrous oxide in the typical dental unit. Machines set
to deliver 70% nitrous oxide, for example, may be delivering only from 30% to 50% nitrous oxide to the patient’s
alveoli due to the factors described above (Fig. 17-8).

MONITORING AND DOCUMENTATION
Clinical observation and intermittent assessment of the
level of sedation must occur throughout the procedure.
This must include the patient’s responsiveness, color, and
assessment of respiratory rate and rhythm. In addition,
the percent of nitrous oxide used, flow rate, duration of
the procedure, and posttreatment oxygenation must be
documented. Informed consent along with the indication
for the use of nitrous oxide/oxygen must be documented

316

Chapter 17

n

Pharmacologic Management of Patient Behavior

CGA
Index connection
pins
number

Gas
Left

6

2

5

5

5

1

5

3

1

2

4

4

2-5
3-5
3-6
2-6
1-6
4-6
2-4
1-5
1-4
7

870
910
920
880
940
930
890
950
960
965

6

Cyclopropane
CGA 920

Nitrogen
CGA 960

4

Oxygen
Nitrous oxide
Cyclopropane
O2-CO2 (CO2<7.5%)
O2-CO2 (CO2>7.5%)
O2-HE (HE>80.5%)
O2-HE (HE<80.5%)
Air
Nitrogen
N2O-O2 (N2O 47.5-52.5%)

Nitrous oxide
CGA 910

Air
CGA 950

2

2

4 7 3

3

Oxygen
CGA 870

1

Right

1

2

6

Carbon dioxide
oxygen mixtures
(CO2 not over 3%)
CGA 880

6

1

6

A
B

Helium-oxygen mixtures
Carbon dioxide
Helium
(He not over 10%)
Helium-oxygen mixtures carbon dioxide oxygen
(O2 less than 20%)
mixtures (CO2 over 7%)
CGA 890
CGA 930
CGA 940

ICC3AA 2015
E-181 - 150
OC & SEC
L

C
D
E
F

G

SP
UN CRO-MO
4M50EE175
6055

H
I
J

Figure 17-7 The pin-index system is used universally to minimize the chance of inadvertent connection of a medical gas to the

wrong supply system.

Percent nitrous oxide

in the record. A dedicated section or form, apart from the
general consent to dental treatment, should be used.

Delivered Nitrous Oxide

50
40

ENTERAL SEDATION TECHNIQUE

30

After the sedative agents have been selected, the proper
dose of medication is calculated for the child. Once the
sedative is administered, the patient should be kept in an
area of the office that allows for continuous monitoring.
When the desired effect is observed (usually after 30 to 60
minutes), the patient is transferred to the chair. Protective restraint devices, such as a papoose board (Fig.17-9,
A), are often helpful to control potentially harmful movements in a sedated child. When such devices are used,
the arms, legs, and pelvis should be aligned and secured,
leaving the chest and diaphragm unrestrained, so that

20
10
0

Machine

Mask

Pharynx

Venous blood

Figure 17-8 The concentration of nitrous oxide that reaches

the blood is often significantly less than the concentration
indicated on the flowmeter.

Chapter 17

n

Pharmacologic Management of Patient Behavior

317

Box 17-2
Discharge Criteria
1.	Cardiovascular function and airway patency are satisfactory and stable.
2.	Patient is easily arousable, and protective reflexes are
intact.
3.	The patient can talk (if age-appropriate).
4.	Patient can sit unaided (if age-appropriate).
5.	For a young child or a child with disabilities, incapable
of the usual expected responses, the presedation level
of responsiveness or a level as close as possible to the
normal level for that child should be achieved.
6.	The state of hydration is adequate.

Box 17-3
Minimum Elements of Post-Sedation
Discharge Instructions
1.	Dietary guidelines
2.	Instructions for taking medications
3.	Description of any restrictions in activity
4.	Identification of a responsible adult who will accompany and observe the patient after discharge
5.	Contact information, including a phone number, and
instructions to follow in the event of postoperative
complications or an emergency

A

B
Figure 17-9 A, Papoose board. B, Shoulder roll placement.

The shoulder roll functions to keep the head rolled up and
back, which allows for a more patent airway.

s­pontaneous breathing is not hindered. A shoulder roll,
placed carefully beneath the upper part of the scapulae,
will often help maintain airway patency during procedures (see Fig.17-9, B). Nitrous oxide and oxygen may be
started at this time to improve oxygenation and provide
small adjustments to the level of sedation as needed. If
the patient is not adequately sedated to the point that
treatment can be accomplished, the attempt should be

aborted. If the patient enters a level of deep sedation or
general anesthesia, and the dentist does not possess comprehensive training in general anesthesia, the procedure
should be stopped and the patient returned to the appropriate level of sedation (usually moderate sedation). If the
dentist is unable to manage the patient after using the
maximum amount of oral medication and nitrous oxide,
the procedure should be terminated. Adding an additional enteral drug to deepen the level of sedation is often unpredictable, prolongs recovery, and may place the child
at risk for resedation after discharge, when professional
supervision is unavailable.
Timing is the most critical factor for successful treatment with enteral sedation techniques, yet practitioners
have little ability to control the depth and duration of enteral sedation. Enteral sedation techniques are best suited
for short procedures that can be accomplished within
the expected working time of the sedative drug. Properly
administered local anesthesia will enhance any level of
anesthesia, but it is particularly useful in maximizing the
effectiveness of minimal and moderate sedation. The patient should be monitored carefully during the procedure,
to ensure responsiveness. Discharge to the parent should
occur only after minimal discharge criteria have been met
(Box 17-2). Full oral and written instructions on postsedation care should be carefully reviewed with the caregiver,
and the written information should be given to that person for easy reference at home (Box 17-3).

318

Chapter 17

n

Pharmacologic Management of Patient Behavior

with other sedative agents to enhance the efficacy of
moderate sedation.54 Evidence shows that the use of
local anesthetics improves the intraoperative and recovery phases of dental rehabilitation under general
anesthesia.55 In many instances the apparent lack of local anesthetic efficacy during pediatric sedation is due
to i­nattention to the expected onset, depth, and duration of local anesthesia. For most anesthetics, profound
pulpal anesthesia exists for a much smaller window of
time than the numbness produced in the surrounding soft tissue56 (Fig. 17-10). Operators should time
local anesthetic administration so that the expected
peak pulpal anesthesia coincides with the execution of
known painful procedures, such as tooth extraction,
pulpotomy, and surgical operations.
Inhalational sedation with nitrous oxide and oxygen
is the next most frequently used agent in combination
techniques. The onset, duration, and offset of oral sedative agents are relatively slow and beyond the control
of the dentist once the drug is swallowed. In contrast,
nitrous oxide is characterized by rapid onset and offset,
is highly controllable, and is easily titrated. Nitrous oxide is well suited to the making of intraoperative adjustments to the level of sedation provided by an oral agent.
In contrast to the nonrecommended practice of dosestacking (adding additional doses of oral sedatives in an
attempt to deepen sedation), nitrous oxide provides rapid enhancement of the sedation level while allowing for
equally rapid reversal of its effects should the enhanced
level of sedation prove to be beyond the intended level
of sedation.
Oral sedative combinations have a long history in
pediatric dentistry. Given the rapid expansion of our
knowledge of central nervous system physiology and
pharmacology over the past 50 years, it is not surprising
that our clinical criteria for oral sedative combinations
have evolved as well. The current concept of an ideal oral
sedative combination calls for drugs with well-described
mechanisms of actions, a wide margin of safety, and evidence to support their use in pediatric dentistry. These
criteria are difficult to fulfill with many of the traditional techniques that used drugs with nonspecific mechanisms of actions and few documented outcome data. In
an analysis of 53 studies of enteral sedation techniques

COMBINATIONS OF METHODS
AND AGENTS
Pain is a complex process consisting of several interrelated components. The most basic component of pain is nociception, the unconscious, reflexive neuronal response
to actual or potential tissue damage. Nociception, in turn,
elicits other involuntary responses such as stimulation of
the sympathetic nervous system, reflex withdrawal from
the stimulus, and various neuroendocrine responses in
both the central nervous system and the peripheral tissues. Consciousness awareness of the event adds another layer to response, resulting in the experience of pain.
Anxiety, the learned anticipation of pain acquired from
previous experiences, may also modify present and future
experiences of pain. Each of these responses possesses its
own neurologic substrate in the nervous system.
No single drug available to the pediatric dentist for
moderate sedation will neutralize all of the components
of the pain process. For example, opioid drugs raise the
threshold for nociception but, when used alone, do not
usually eliminate the dental patient’s awareness of the
procedure. Benzodiazepines have specific anxiolytic, amnesia-producing, and muscle-relaxant effects that minimize or eliminate awareness of the procedure but do not
affect nociception. If sedative drugs are chosen and dosed
appropriately, drug combinations can be more effective
than single drugs in a given situation, because more components of the pain and anxiety response are neutralized
with the drug combination. The practice of using drug
combinations must be judicious and thoughtful, however,
because the potential for adverse outcomes is likely to increase when three or more sedative drugs are administered
during pediatric sedation.53 This is because each sedative
drug has side effects in addition to the intended action;
drugs interact with each other to produce new, unanti­cipated
effects, and the chances of unintended conse­quences
increase with the complexity of the drug combination.
Local anesthetics block the nociceptive process,
preventing both the immediate sensation of pain and
secondary disruption of sedation caused by autonomic
and neuroendocrine responses. Local anesthesia is an
integral part of levels of dental sedation and is often
the most appropriate first choice of drugs to combine

4% Articaine
1:100,000 epinephrine

Soft tissue
anesthesia

3% Mepivacaine

Pulpal
anesthesia

2% Lidocaine
1:100,000 epinephrine
0

30

60

90

120 150
Minutes

180

210

240

Figure 17-10 Producing high-quality local anesthesia is a fundamental component of successful moderate sedation. The peak

effect of local anesthesia should ideally correspond to the peak surgical stimulation produced by the dental procedure. The use
of a clock is useful for timing the appropriate administration of local anesthetic during sedation.

Chapter 17

published between 1996 and 2005, Robb was unable to
identify differences in the efficacy of drug combinations
used for pediatric dentistry, due to poor reporting practices and the lack of a standard scoring system.57 A more
recent analysis of 36 more recent studies of pediatric
dental sedations showed weak evidence for the efficacy
of oral midazolam and nitrous oxide.58 Chowdhury and
Vargus compared a chloral hydrate, meperidine, and hydroxyzine combination with oral midazolam and concluded that the chloral hydrate combinations showed
significantly more effective sedation than midazolam.59
A comparison of hydroxyzine/midazolam with hydroxyzine and chloral hydrate/hydroxyzine by Torres-Perez
et al. concluded that regimens of midazolam or chloral
hydrate mixed with hydroxyzine represented excellent
choices for conscious sedation.60
Chloral hydrate became unavailable in the United
States after February 2012. Prior to its discontinuance,
certain chloral hydrate combinations had a reputation
for being effective, yet remained controversial. A retrospective chart review of 195 cases showed that 50 mg/
kg chloral hydrate combined with either meperidine
or hydroxyzine was judged to be satisfactory in 72% of
cases.61 Higher doses of chloral hydrate with nitrous oxide were also judged as effective; however, the risk of airway compromise, respiratory depression, and exceeding
moderate sedation increased significantly with increasing
doses.62,63 Despite the apparent success of these combinations, concerns surfaced in several reports about the use
of chloral hydrate. In a review of poor outcomes associated with chloral hydrate in medical and dental practice,
Cote et al. found that 5 of 13 cases of death or permanent
brain damage were dental patients.64 Incorrect dosing,
poor communication among dental staff, and failure to
rescue patients from deeper than intended levels of sedation have been cited as major factors leading to the poor
outcomes in dental settings.65

Death or brain damage
Full recovery

Opioid dose
(multiples of the MRD)

4x

3x

2x

1x

1x

2x
3x
4x
Local anesthetic dose
(multiples of the MRD)

Figure 17-11 Caution must be exercised when local an-

esthetics are used together with opioids during pediatric
sedation.

n

Pharmacologic Management of Patient Behavior

319

One recent attempt to identify an alternative to chloral hydrate combinations has been the use of midazolam in combination with meperidine and hydroxyzine.
Sheroan et al. found no difference in behavioral outcomes or physiologic parameters when this combination
was compared with chloral hydrate, meperidine, and
hydroxyzine.66 Further investigation of the safety and
efficacy of this and similar combinations is needed, particularly regarding the continued use of opioids in such
combinations. A dose-dependent increase in untoward
outcomes, including hypoxia, has been demonstrated
for meperidine.67 Opioids have also been associated with
significant local anesthetic toxicity when both have been
used as part of a pediatric sedation regimen.68,69 The interaction results in a lowering of the convulsant threshold
for local anesthetic toxicity. Although the mechanism
is multifaceted, opioids may produce a mild respiratory
acidosis that decreases the binding of local anesthetics
to serum albumin, permitting more free drug to circulate
to the CNS. In a review of adverse drug interactions in
dental practice, an expert panel rated this interaction as
highly significant, particularly with the combination of
meperidine and mepivacaine70 (Fig. 17-11).

FACILITIES AND EQUIPMENT
Although not necessary, a comfortable, single-patient,
“quiet room” is helpful. It isolates the sedation in progress from the activity of a typical pediatric dental practice
and reduces noise and other distractions that may compromise the ability of the doctor and staff to focus fully
on the patient. The facility should also be equipped with
adequate suction, monitoring devices, and a positive-pressure oxygen delivery system that is capable of sustaining
greater than 90% oxygen at a flow of 10 L/min for at least
60 minutes (650-L E cylinder). When a self-inflating bagvalve-mask device is used for delivering positive-pressure
oxygen, a 15-L/min flow is recommended. A functional
suction apparatus with appropriate suction catheters and a
sphygmomanometer with cuffs of appropriate size for pediatric patients must be immediately available. All equipment must be adaptable to children of all ages and sizes.2
As previously stated, all inhalational sedation equipment must have the capability for immediate delivery
of 100% oxygen with a minimum delivery of 30%. The
apparatus must have a fail-safe system that accomplishes
complete shutdown when the oxygen supply drops below
the 30% level. If nitrous oxide–oxygen delivery equipment capable of delivering more than 70% nitrous oxide and less than 30% oxygen is used, an in-line oxygen
analyzer must be used. This system must be checked and
calibrated annually.
Timely and effective airway management is the most
important factor. In the emergency airway armamentarium, drugs and equipment needed to resuscitate an apneic, unconscious patient must be fresh and close at hand.
An adequate positive-pressure device, such as an Ambu
bag or a modified Jackson-Rees circuit, should be kept in
the quiet room to provide immediate positive-pressure
ventilation should a patient become apneic (Fig. 17-12).
Although ventilation with an Ambu bag and insertion of

320

Chapter 17

n

Pharmacologic Management of Patient Behavior

A

B

Figure 17-12 Nitrous oxide delivery systems are designed to provide a sedative mixture of gas to patients breathing spontaneously. They are not designed to deliver positive-pressure ventilation in an emergency. Dentists should have an adequate
emergency breathing circuit, such as an Ambu bag, A, or modified Jackson-Rees circuit, B, which can be used to deliver
positive-pressure oxygen when indicated.

Table 17-3
Continuum of Depth of Sedation: Definition of General Anesthesia and Levels of Sedation/
Analgesia

Responsiveness

Airway
Spontaneous
ventilation
Cardiovascular
function

Minimal Sedation
Anxiolysis

Moderate Sedation/Analgesia
(“conscious sedation”)

Normal response
to verbal
stimulation
Unaffected

Purposeful response to
verbal or tactile
stimulation
No intervention required

Unaffected
Unaffected

Deep Sedation/Analgesia

General Anesthesia

Adequate

Purposeful response
following repeated or
painful stimulation
Intervention may be
required
May be inadequate

Unarousable even with
painful
stimulus
Intervention often
required
Frequently inadequate

Usually maintained

Usually maintained

May be impaired

(Accessed from the American Society of Anesthesiologists, https://www.asahq.org/For-Members/Standards-Guidelines-and-Statements.aspx,
July 30, 2014.)

a supraglottic emergency airway device are part of the current Basic Life Support guidelines offered by the American
Heart Association, the use of these devices should be reviewed in regular emergency drills in offices that provide
sedation to pediatric patients.

DOCUMENTATION
Clear and complete documentation of the sedation procedure is essential for many reasons. Good records enable a practitioner to address postoperative concerns
after discharge, evaluate problems or concerns discovered on follow-up or subsequent appointments, and
participate in continuous quality improvement practices
(CQI). Preprocedural records should document: (1) adherence to food and liquid intake restrictions; (2) preoperative health evaluation, including the patient’s health
history and a complete physical assessment along with

the patient’s current weight, age, and baseline vital signs;
(3) name and address of the physician who usually cares
for the child; (4) a note as to why the particular method of management was selected; (5) documentation of
informed consent; and (6) the delivery of instructions
to the caregiver. Before the procedure is undertaken, a
“time out” should be performed to confirm the patient’s
name, the procedure to be performed, and the site of the
procedure.
Intraoperatively, the appropriate vital signs should be
recorded as they are assessed (Table 17-3). Timed notations regarding the patient’s appearance and significant
intraoperative events should be included. The type of
drug, dose administered, route and site of administration,
and time of administration should be clearly indicated. If
a prescription is used, either a copy of the prescription or
a note as to what was prescribed should also be a part of
the permanent record.

Chapter 17

After treatment is completed, the patient should be observed in a recovery area equipped with suction and the
capability to provide positive-pressure ventilation. Vital
signs should be recorded at specific intervals. If the patient
is not fully alert, oxygen saturation and heart rate should
be continuously monitored until discharge criteria are met.
The doctor administering the sedation is responsible for
determining when fitness for discharge is achieved.

PATIENT SELECTION AND PREPARATION
INDICATIONS
No single agent, drug combination, or technique should
be expected to be successful every time. The dentist should
choose the agent and technique that best fit the patient
type as well as the nature of what needs to be accomplished.
Pediatric dentists have often found behavioral or anxietyassessment profiles to be helpful in determining the most
appropriate form of behavioral management for a child.71,72
As the practitioner gains experience, equal or greater value
will be placed on his/her intuition and judgment.

PREOPERATIVE EVALUATION
A thorough review of the medical history is required to
determine whether a patient is a good candidate for sedation. This review may also include a recent medical history
and physical examination from another qualified provider, as indicated. The review of medical history, along with
a focused physical assessment, enables the dentist to arrive
at a physical status classification.
The physical status classification system of the American Society of Anesthesiologists is the most commonly
used method of determining the physical status for patients undergoing any form of anesthesia (Box 17-4).
Following a review of the medical history and physical
evaluation, patients are classified into one of six categories. Patients who are classified as ASA class I are frequently considered appropriate candidates for minimal,
moderate, or deep sedation. Many children classified as
ASA class II may also benefit from appropriate procedural
sedation; however, consultation with an anesthesiologist
or appropriate medical specialist is often desired. Children classified as ASA class III and ASA class IV, children
with special needs, and those with anatomic airway abnormalities or extreme tonsillar hypertrophy require additional medical consultation as part of the preoperative
evaluation, and are often better managed by a physician
anesthesiologist or dentist anesthesiologist.
The medical history should include the following
­information:
  
1.	Allergies and previous allergic or adverse drug reactions.
2.	Current medications, including dosage, time, route,
and site of administration for prescription, over-thecounter, herbal, or illicit drugs. Many drugs, including
herbal agents (e.g., St. John’s Wort, Echinacea, kava,
valerian), may alter drug pharmacokinetics, prolonging the effects of sedative agents.
3.	Diseases or abnormalities in the patient, including pregnancy status of adolescents and neurologic impairment

n

Pharmacologic Management of Patient Behavior

321

Box 17-4
American Society of Anesthesiologists’
Physical Status Classification System
ASA Physical Status 1 - A normal healthy patient
ASA Physical Status 2 - A patient with mild systemic
disease
ASA Physical Status 3 - A patient with severe systemic
disease
ASA Physical Status 4 - A patient with a severe systemic
disease that is a constant threat to life
ASA Physical Status 5 - A moribund patient who is not
expected to survive without the operation
ASA Physical Status 6 - A patient who has been declared
brain dead and whose organs are being removed for
donor purposes
that might increase the potential for airway obstruction, such as a history of snoring or obstructive sleep
apnea.
4.	Previous hospitalizations, including the date, purpose,
and hospital course.
5.	History of general anesthesia or sedation and any associated complication.
6.	Family history of diseases and sedation or anesthetic
complications.
7.	Review of body systems.
8.	Age (in years and months) and weight.
9.	Name, address, and contact information of the child’s
medical home.
  
The physical evaluation should include the following:
  
1.	Height and weight.
2.	Vital signs, including heart, respiratory rates, blood
pressure, and temperature. If determination of baseline vital signs is prevented by the patient’s physical resistance or emotional condition, the reason(s)
should be documented.
3.	Evaluation of airway patency, to include tonsillar size
and anatomic abnormalities that may increase the
risk of airway obstruction (e.g., mandibular hypoplasia, large, short neck, limited mandibular range of
motion).
4.	Physical abnormalities or conditions that may affect
routine intraoperative monitoring (e.g., recent orthopedic injuries to arms or legs, active skin rashes).
  
Dentists should also assess the degree to which behavioral abnormalities will affect the ability for the child to
be assessed during sedation. The child’s failure to respond
appropriately to verbal interaction places a greater degree
of responsibility upon the dentist for determining and
maintaining an appropriate level of sedation.

INFORMED CONSENT
The parent or legal guardian must consent to the use of
sedation for the child. These individuals are entitled to
receive complete information regarding the reasonably
foreseeable risks and the benefits associated with the particular technique and agents being used, as well as any
alternative methods available. Therefore the explanation

322

Chapter 17

n

Pharmacologic Management of Patient Behavior

should be in clear, concise terms that are familiar to them.
Informed consent forms should contain the parent’s or
guardian’s signature and the date upon which informed
consent was obtained, as well as the date upon which the
sedation is planned. If informed consent is obtained prior
to the date of the procedure, consent should be reaffirmed
on the day of surgery prior to the start of treatment. The
doctor must be satisfied that the parent or legal guardian
has the capacity to understand the risks and benefits of
the procedure and is able to provide voluntary consent
that is free of coercion.73 Because sedation is not considered a routine part of every dental visit, this consent
should be separate and distinct from permission to treat
the patient.

INSTRUCTIONS TO PARENTS
Information in written form should be reviewed with the
person caring for the child and given to this person along
with the notice of the scheduled appointment. This information should include a 24-hour contact number for
the practitioner.
The American Academy of Pediatric Dentistry specifies
the following preoperative dietary instructions:
  
1.	Clear liquids: water, fruit juices without pulp, carbonated beverages, clear tea, or black coffee up to 2 hours
before the procedure.
2.	Breast milk up to 4 hours before the procedure.
3.	Infant formula up to 6 hours before the procedure.
4.	Nonhuman milk up to 6 hours before the procedure.
5.	A light meal up to 6 hours before the procedure. A
light meal typically consists of toast and clear liquids. Meals that include fried or fatty foods or meat
may prolong gastric emptying times and should be
avoided.
6.	It is permissible for routine necessary medications
to be taken with a sip of water on the day of the
procedure.
  
The reasons for these recommendations are twofold.
First, emesis during or immediately after a sedative procedure is a potential complication that can result in the aspiration of stomach contents, leading to laryngospasm or
severe airway obstruction. Aspiration may have serious sequelae, including aspiration pneumonitis and potentially
fatal pulmonary damage. Second, the uptake of sedative
agents administered by the oral route is maximized when
the stomach is empty.
The parent or guardian should also be advised that he
or she will be expected to remain in the area of the office
during the sedation appointment. With regard to transportation, the instructions should request that a second
person accompany the parent so that the person caring
for the child may be free to attend to the child’s needs
during the trip home.
The caregiver should be advised that, on arriving home,
the child may sleep, feel drowsy, or display irritability. It is
important to stress the need for frequent observation of the
child for an appropriate period of time. The dentist should
consider the types of agents used and the expected duration
of drug effects when advising the caregiver on the length of
time a child should be closely supervised at home. Inappropriate or inaccurate postoperative instructions may cause

caregivers to question their credibility or dismiss other postoperative instructions.
Many pediatric dentists recommend that children first
be offered clear liquids after sedation and advance to solid
foods as tolerated. Once solids are tolerated, there are no
dietary restrictions other than those imposed as a result of
the dental procedure performed. This practice is based on
concern that premature feeding may contribute to nausea,
thus prolonging the reintroduction of solid foods. There
are several causes of nausea and vomiting after sedation.
Risk factors include the use of nitrous oxide or opioid
medications, swallowing of blood, relative hypoxia, premature ambulation, inadequate pain control, and procedures lasting over 30 minutes.74 Dentists should carefully
consider additional factors to maximize the prevention of
postoperative nausea and vomiting. Verbal and written
instructions should be provided to the parent or guardian before the patient is discharged from the office (Box
14-2). The time at which the dentist determined fitness
for discharge should be noted, along with a notation that
oral and written discharge instructions were provided.

MONITORING
INTRAOPERATIVE MONITORING
Intraoperative monitoring must include an assessment of
oxygenation, ventilation, and circulation. The depth of
sedation dictates the degree and frequency of monitoring
required.75
As the treatment progresses, the state of consciousness
should be evaluated frequently by verbal communication
with the patient. For those patients incapable of communication, either because of age or disability, some means
of evoking a response should be used. Another area of
assessment is the patient’s external appearance. The oral
mucosa, the nail beds, and the complexion of the skin
provide indications of perfusion of the patient. This
should be done at intervals throughout the procedure and
documented in the record. If restraining devices that cover the patient are used, a hand or foot should be exposed.
These devices should be carefully applied to the sedated
patient to ensure that there is no restriction of the chest.
The heart and respiratory rates can be continuously
monitored with a pretracheal stethoscope (Fig. 17-13).
The bell of the stethoscope is secured in the suprasternal
notch, where breath and heart sounds are easily auscultated. This instrument allows for continuous monitoring of the rate and depth of breathing. These devices are
manufactured with a variety of amplification schemes,
including a remote earpiece and a wireless speaker that
transmits the patient’s breath sounds throughout the entire operatory. Additional ventilatory monitoring should
include observation of chest excursions. The common
dental team habit of using the patient’s chest as an ad hoc
instrument table, or completely covering the chest with
towels or other barriers, interferes with the observation of
chest excursions and should be avoided when possible.
Although it is acceptable to measure physiologic parameters using the basic methods of auscultation and an
aneroid sphygmomanometer with a manually inflated

Chapter 17

A

n

Pharmacologic Management of Patient Behavior

323

B

Figure 17-13 Pretracheal stethoscopy provides the dentist with the ability to listen to breath sounds while watching other indi-

cators of ventilation. A, Proper placement of chest piece on patient. B, Wireless system. (B, Courtesy of Sedation Resource.)

cuff, numerous automatic, continuous-monitoring blood
pressure devices are available. In all instances, the cuff
should be of the appropriate size for the patient. Pulse
oximetry probes are available that attach to the finger
or earlobe and produce both visual and audible signals.
The pulse oximeter and automatic blood pressure cuff
are often bundled together in a single monitor that may
also include additional physiologic monitoring devices
(Fig. 17-14).
In 1981 the introduction of pulse oximetry to health
care providers created a revolution in patient safety monitoring. By 1987 it had become part of the standard monitoring armamentarium for anesthesia providers and is used
in many other locations where the monitoring of the effectiveness of a patient’s breathing is desired. The device measures the e­ xtent to which hemoglobin is saturated with
oxygen while simultaneously monitoring the peripheral
pulse rate. A probe consisting of an optical diode sensor
and a second, light-emitting diode is applied to a digit on
the hand or foot, or to the earlobe. The light-emitting diode emits both red and infrared wavelengths of light, and
the light-detecting diode detects light transmitted through
the tissue. Red wavelengths are absorbed primarily by oxygenated h
­ emoglobin, whereas infrared wavelengths are
absorbed primarily by deoxygenated hemoglobin. The ratio of deoxygenated hemoglobin to oxygenated hemoglobin is determined and displayed. One shortcoming of the
pulse oximeter is a processing delay of approximately 20
to 40 seconds. This is particularly pertinent for pediatric
dentists because children may begin to experience oxygen
desaturation within 10 to 20 seconds after the onset of
breathlessness (Video 17-1: A
­ irway management in office
base anesthesia). For this reason, it is important that the
pulse oximeter be appreciated as a monitor of oxygenation,
not of ventilation. Several conditions can also lead to inaccurate oximeter readings, including (1) failure to place
diodes directly opposite each other, (2) interference from
ambient light, (3) placement of diodes on the same limb
as a blood pressure cuff, (4) fingernail polish on the digit
to which the sensor is attached, (5) cold limbs, (6) profound tissue pigmentation, (7) reuse of disposable sensors,

and (8) motion artifacts. Sensor displacement is the most
common cause for false readings in children and can be
minimized by the use of a sensor with adhesive tabs rather
than a clip-on sensor. Securing the sensor with additional
tape and using a toe rather than a finger may also help
minimize displacement.
The correlation between the percent oxygen saturation of hemoglobin (Sao2) and oxygen tension in arterial
blood (Pao2) must be appreciated when oxygen saturation is interpreted. The relationship between the two parameters is plotted on the oxyhemoglobin dissociation
curve (Fig. 17-15). Unbound oxygen dissolved in blood
produces the oxygen tension (Pao2) required to supply
oxygen to peripheral tissues. When a patient stops breathing, hypoxemia begins when oxygen saturation drops to
95%, corresponding to an oxygen tension of 80 mm Hg.
Once the arterial saturation levels drop to 90% (Pao2 = 60
mm Hg), the patient will begin to desaturate rapidly if
effective ventilation is not immediately restored. Awareness of the peripheral oxygen saturation from moment to
moment is important during the administration of sedation because hypoxia is almost always the initial event in
morbidity and mortality related to sedation.76
Ventilation, i.e., the mechanical act of moving air
throughout the respiratory system, must be evaluated independently from oxygenation. Methods used to monitor ventilation include visual monitoring for chest wall
movement, listening for breath sounds with a precordial
stethoscope, determination of respiratory rate, and capnography. Capnography is the most sensitive of these
methods, providing direct confirmation of apnea within
seconds after breathing is interrupted. When possible, the
combination of capnography and precordial stethoscopy
provides the optimal strategy for monitoring the adequacy of breathing during the course of pediatric sedation.
The capnograph (Fig. 17-16, A) detects both the presence
and the quality of ventilation by analyzing the concentration of carbon dioxide in the exhaled gases through
­differential infrared absorption. The end-tidal carbon dioxide concentration is the concentration of carbon dioxide measured at the terminal portion of the exhalation

324

Chapter 17

n

Pharmacologic Management of Patient Behavior

A

B

C

D

Figure 17-14 Physiologic monitoring should be chosen to conform to basic standards of intraoperative monitoring while

matching the needs of the pediatric dentist. Devices should be appropriately sized for pediatric patients. A wide variety of
monitors exists. A, Blood pressure cuffs in various sizes. B, Pulse oximetry probes with and without adhesive tabs. C, Automated vital signs monitor. D, Pulse oximeter.
curve (see Fig. 17-16, B).18 The sampling line is placed either in the nostril or in close approximation to the nose
or mouth and allows for sampling of exhaled air into
the unit. There are limitations to the accuracy of readings, especially when the device is used in children. Head
movement, mouth breathing, crying, and tube blockage
by mucous all result in inaccurate readings. In 2014 the
American Association of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgeons
mandated the use of capnography whenever possible during moderate sedation as part of its standard of care.77

Saturation (%)

95
90

70

POSTOPERATIVE MONITORING

40

60

80

PAO2 (mm Hg)

Figure 17-15 Oxyhemoglobin dissociation curve, which

shows the saturation of hemoglobin with oxygen (Sao2) relative to oxygen tension (Pao2). Hypoxemia is defined as Pao2
below 80 mm Hg (95% Sao2). (From Dionne R, Phero, J,
Becker D. Management of pain and anxiety in the dental office,
Philadelphia, 2002, WB Saunders.)

Determining fitness for discharge is a critical part of the
sedation process because it marks the point at which supervision of the child is relinquished from the professional staff to the parents. The child must be reasonably alert,
able to talk, ambulating with minimal assistance, and sitting unaided. The child should be able to remain awake
for at least 20 minutes, unstimulated, before discharge.
For the very young patient or a patient with disabilities,
either of whom might be incapable of the usually expected responses, a level of awareness that is as close to the
usual state as possible for that person must be achieved
before discharge. Fitness for discharge is the responsibility
of the doctor and must be documented.53

Chapter 17

n

Pharmacologic Management of Patient Behavior

325

of pharmacologic management. Where there is doubt,
the sedation protocol should be modified or abandoned.
3)	Appreciate the limits of moderate sedation. Patient
responsiveness is inherent in moderate sedation.
Sometimes the responsiveness of the patient will
interfere with dental treatment, causing treatment to
be modified or abandoned. When treatment cannot
be accomplished with moderate sedation, alternative
strategies, such as general anesthesia performed by
appropriately trained providers, should be considered.

A
Normal capnogram

REFERENCES
C
B

A
A: Exhalation begins
B-C: Plateau  outflow of alveolar gas
D: End-tidal CO2

D

B

Figure 17-16 Capnography. A, The monitor produces a

waveform by the continuous analysis of expired gas for carbon dioxide. B, The presence of a waveform implies exhalation of gases from the lungs. The end-tidal carbon dioxide
concentration (point C) corresponds to the concentration of
alveolar gas, which correlates closely with the arterial partial
pressure of carbon dioxide. (A, Courtesy of Capnocheck
by Smiths Medical ASD, Inc., St. Paul, Minnesota; B, from
Anderson J, Vann W. Respiratory monitoring during pediatric sedation: pulse oximetry and capnography, Pediatr Dent
10:94-101, 1988.)

CONCLUDING THOUGHTS
The American Academy of Pediatric Dentistry and the
American Dental Association have published several
guidelines to assist the dentist in performing moderate sedation. Items from these guidelines have been referenced
in several places throughout this chapter. In addition to
these valuable sets of guidelines, three principles are offered here for dentists undertaking moderate sedation for
children:
  
1)	Primum non nocere is the Latin phrase translated
as “first, do no harm.” It is the guiding bioethical
principle for all health care providers and is based
on the Hippocratic Oath. Prior to undertaking any
pediatric sedation, the dentist must be satisfied that
the potential benefits of treatment outweigh potential
risks, and that the decision is founded on appropriate
information.
2)	Airway management supersedes pharmacologic management. The maintenance of adequate ventilation and
oxygenation must be ensured throughout all phases

1.	Wilson S: Pharmacological management of the pediatric
dental patient, Ped Dent 26:131–134, 2004.
2.	Cote C: Commentary on article by Vlade et al., Am J Roentgenol 165:910–912, 1995.
3.	Boynes S: Dental anesthesiology: a guide to the rules and regulations of the USA 5th Edition. 2013 No-No Orchard Publishing,
USA, pp 52–1024.
4.	Hicks CG, et al.: Demand in pediatric dentistry for sedation
and general anesthesia by dentist anesthesiologists: a survey
of directors of dentist anesthesiologists and pediatric dentistry residencies, Anesth Prog 59:3–11, 2012.
5.	Excerpted from Continuum of Depth of Sedation: Definition of General Anesthesia and Levels of Sedation/Analgesia,
2004, of the American Society of Anesthesiologists (ASA).
A copy of the full text can be obtained from ASA, 520 N.
Northwest Highway, Park Ridge, IL 60068–62573.
6.	Green SM: Procedural sedation: moving beyond conscious
sedation, Anal Emerg Med 39:433–435, 2002.
7.	Cote C, Wilson S: Guidelines for the monitoring and management of pediatric patients during and after sedation for diagnostic and therapeutic procedures, Pediatrics 118:2587–2603,
2006.
8.	Haynes AB, et al.: A surgical safety checklist to reduce morbidity and mortality in a global population, New Engl J Med
360:491–499, 2009.
9.	Cote C: Discharge criteria for children sedated by nonanesthesiologists, Anesthesiology 100:207–209, 2004.
10.	Lee H, et al.: Trends in death associated with pediatric dental sedation and general anesthesia, Pediatr Anesth 23:741–746, 2013.
11.	Perouansky M, Hemmings HC: Neurotoxicity of general anesthetics: cause for concern? Anesthesiology 111:1365–1371,
2009.
12.	Sun L: Early childhood general anaesthesia exposure and neurocognitive development, Br J Anaesth 105(Suppl 1):i61–i68,
2010.
13.	Southall DP, et al.: Study of cardiac rhythm in healthy newborn infants, Br Heart J 41:382, 1979.
14.	Katz J, Steward DJ: Anesthesia and uncommon diseases, ed 4,
Philadelphia, 1998, WB Saunders.
15.	Hislop A, et al.: Postnatal growth and function of the preacinar airways, Thorax 27:265–274, 1972.
16.	Giovannitti JA: Dental anesthesia and pediatric dentistry,
Anesth Prog 42:95–99, 1995.
17.	Cote CJ, et al.: A practice of anesthesia for infants and children,
ed 4, Philadelphia, 2009, WB Saunders, p 662.
18.	2009 Pediatric Nutrition Surveillance System data (PedNSS),
www.cdc.gov/pednss/pdfs/PedNSS.
19.	Childhood Obesity Facts, last accessed January 23, 2015. http://
www.cdc.gov/healthyyouth/obesity/facts.htm.
20.	Narang I, Mathew JL: Childhood obesity and obstructive
sleep apnea, J Nutrition Metab 8, 2012. 2012: ID 134202.
21.	Sorof J, Daniels S: Obesity hypertension in children: a problem of epidemic proportions, Hypertension 40:441–447, 2002.

326

Chapter 17

n

Pharmacologic Management of Patient Behavior

22.	Stambaugh JE, et al.: The clinical pharmacology of meperidine – comparison of routes of administration, J Clin Pharmacol 16:245–256, 1976.
23.	Pharmacokinetics In: Goodman and Gilman’s The pharmacological basis of therapeutics. In Brunton L, Chabner B, Knollman E,
editors, 12 ed. New York, 2001, McGraw-Hill, p 20.
24.	Granoff DM, et al.: Cardiorespiratory arrest following aspiration of chloral hydrate, Am J Dis Child 122:170–171, 1971.
25.	Guidelines for the use of sedation and anesthesia by dentists:
American Dental Association, Last accessed January 23, 2015.
www.ada.org, 2012.
26.	Pharmacokinetics In: Goodman and Gilman’s The pharmacological basis of therapeutics. In Brunton L, Chabner B, Knollman E, editors, 12 ed. New York, 2001, McGraw-Hill, p 22.
27.	Cohen EN, et al.: Occupational disease in dentistry and exposure to trace anesthetic gases, J Am Dent Assoc 101:21–31, 1980.
28.	Thallar M: Histamine in the regulation of wakefulness, Sleep
Med Rev 15:65–74, 2011.
29.	Richelson E: Neuroleptic affinities for human brain receptors
and their use in predicting adverse effects, J Clin Psychiatr
45:331–336, 1984.
30.	Paton D, Webster D: Clinical pharmacokinetics of H1 receptor antagonists, Clin Pharmacokinetics 10:477–479, 1985.
31.	Taylor G, et al.: Determination of promethazine in biological
fluids, Anal Lett 12:1435–1442, 1979.
32.	Hickson GB, et al.: Should promethazine in liquid form be
available without prescription? Pediatrics 86:221–225, 1990.
33.	Ghoneim MM, Mewaldt SP: Benzodiazepines and human
memory: a review, Anesthesiology 72:926–938, 1990.
34.	Charney DS, Mihic SJ, Harris RA: Hypnotics and sedatives. In
Brunton L, Chabner B, Knollman E, editors, 12 ed. Goodman
and Gilman’s The pharmacological basis of therapeutics, New
York, 2001, McGraw-Hill.
35.	Stoelting RK: Benzodiazepines. In: Pharmacology and physiology in anesthetic practice, ed 4, New York, 2006, Lippincott.
36.	Reeves JG, et al.: Midazolam: pharmacology and uses, Anesthesiology 62:310–324, 1985.
37.	Mohler H, Okada T: Benzodiazepine receptor: demonstration
of the central nervous system, Science 198:849–851, 1977.
38.	White PF, et al.: Comparison of midazolam and diazepam for
sedation during plastic surgery, Plast Reconstr Surg 81:703–712,
1988.
39.	Bailey PL, et al.: Frequent hypoxia and apnea after sedation
with midazolam and fentanyl, Anesthesiology 73:826–830,
1990.
40.	Miller DR: Midazolam and awareness with recall during total
intravenous anesthesia, Can J Anaesth 43:946–953, 1996.
41.	Miller R: Duration of amnesia associated with midazolam/
fentanyl intravenous administration, J Oral Maxillofac Surg
47:155–158, 1989.
42.	Brosius KK, Bannister CF: Midazolam premedication in children: a comparison of two dosage formulations on sedation
score and plasma levels, Anesth Analg 96:392–395, 2003.
43.	Khalil SN, et al.: A paediatric trial comparing midazolam/
Syrplata mixture with premixed midazolam syrup (Roche),
Paediatr Anaesth 13:205–209, 2003.
44.	Heniff MS, et al.: Comparison of routes of flumazenil administration to reverse midazolam-induced respiratory depression in a canine model, Acad Emerge Med 4:1115–1118, 1997.
45.	Hosaka K, et al.: Flumazenil reversal of sublingual triazolam: a randomized controlled clinical trial, J Am Dent Assoc
140:559–566, 2009.
46.	Lovinger DM, et al.: Trichloroethanol potentiates synaptic transmission mediated by gamma aminobutyric acid
receptors in hippocampal neurons, J Pharmacol Exp Ther
264:1079–1103, 1993.

47.	Bowyer K, Glasser SP: Chloral hydrate overdose and cardiac
arrhythmias, Chest 77:232–235, 1980.
48.	Brown AM, Cade JF: Cardiac arrhythmias after chloral hydrate overdose, Med J Aust 1:28–29, 1980.
49.	Gerretsen M, de Groot G, van Heijst ANP, Maes RA: Chloral hydrate poisoning: its mechanism and therapy, Vet Hum
Toxicol 21(Suppl):53–56, 1979.
50.	Guidelines for the use of nitrous oxide for pediatric dental
pati­ents, Am Acad Pediatr Dent Ref Man 35:13–14, last accessed
January 24, 2015. www.aapd.org/media/Policies_Guidelines/
G_Nitrous.pdf.
51.	Chrysikopoulou A, et al.: Effectiveness of two nitrous oxide
scavenging nasal hoods during routine pediatric dental treatment, Pediatr Dent 28:242–247, 2006.
52.	Allen GD, et al.: The efficacy of the laryngeal reflex in conscious sedation, J Am Dent Assoc 96:901–903, 1977.
53.	Cote CJ, et al.: Adverse sedation events in pediatrics: analysis of medications used for sedation, Pediatrics 106:633–644,
2000.
54.	American Dental Association: Guidelines for the use of sedation
and general anesthesia by dentists, Last accessed January 24,
2015. www.ada.org.
55.	Townsend JA, et al.: The use of local anesthesia during dental rehabilitation: a survey of AAPD members, Pediatric Dent
35:422–425, 2013.
56.	Yagiela I: Local anesthetics, Anesth Prog 38:128–141, 1991.
57.	Robb ND: Which is the most effective drug or method of
sedation used for anxious children? What are the most effective techniques for the use of conscious sedation behavior
management in paediatric dentistry? Evid Based Dent 6(3):71,
2005.
58.	Lourenco-Matharu L, et al.: Sedation of children undergoing
dental treatment, Cochrane Database Syst Rev 14(3):77–79,
2012.
59.	Chowdhury J, Vargas KG: Comparison of chloral hydrate,
meperidine and hydroxyzine to midazolam regimens for oral
sedation of pediatric dental patients, Pediatr Dent 27:191–197,
2005.
60.	Torres-Perez J: Comparison of three conscious sedation regimens for pediatric dental patients, J Clin Pediatr Dent 31:
183–186, 2007.
61.	Leelataweedwud P, Vann WF: Adverse events and outcomes
of conscious sedation for pediatric patients: study of an oral
sedation regimen, J Am Dent Assoc 132:1531–1539, 2001.
62.	Littman R, et al.: Chloral hydrate sedation: the additive respiratory depressant effects of nitrous oxide, Anesth Analg
86:724–728, 1998.
63.	Moore PA, et al.: Sedation in pediatric dentistry: a practical
assessment procedure, J Am Dent Assoc 109:564–569, 1984.
64.	Cote C, et al.: Adverse sedation events in pediatrics: analysis of medications used for sedation, Pediatrics 106:633–642,
2000.
65.	Hayden J: Chloral hydrate as a sedative in dentistry, J Colo
Dent Assoc 61:3–4, 1982.
66.	Sheroan MM: A prospective study of 2 sedation regimens in
children: chloral hydrate, meperidine and hydroxyzine versus midazolam, meperidine and hydroxyzine, Anesth Prog
53:83–90, 2006.
67.	McKee KC, et al.: Dose response characteristics of meperidine
in preschool children, Pediatr Dent 12:222–227, 1990.
68.	Goodson JM, Moore PA: Life-threatening reactions following pedodontic sedations: an assessment of narcotic, local
anesthetic and antiemetic drug interactions, J Am Dent Assoc
107:239–245, 1983.
69.	Moore PA, Goodson JM: Risk appraisal of narcotic sedation
for children, Anesth Progr 32:129–139, 1985.

Chapter 17

70.	Moore PM: Adverse drug interactions in dental practice: interactions associated with local anesthetics, sedatives and
anxiolytics, J Am Dent Assoc 130:541–554, 1999.
71.	Venham LL, et al.: Interval rating scales for children’s dental anxiety and uncooperative behavior, Pediatr Dent 2:195–202, 1980.
72.	Frankl SN, et al.: Should the parent remain with the child in
the dental operatory? J Dent Children 29:150–163, 1962.
73.	Beauchamp TL, Childress J: Principles of biomedical ethics,
4 ed, New York, 1994, New Oxford University Press.
74.	Kovac AL: Management of postoperative nausea and vomiting in children, Pediatr Drugs 91:47–69, 2007.

n

Pharmacologic Management of Patient Behavior

327

75.	
American Academy of Pediatric Dentistry: Guidelines for
monitoring and management of pediatric patients during
and after sedation for diagnostic and therapeutic procedures,
Pediatr Dent 29:134–143, 2008.
76.	Cote C, et al.: Adverse sedation events in pediatrics: a critical incident analysis of contributing factors, Pediatrics 105:
805–814, 2000.
77.	
American Association of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgeons:
last accessed www.aaoms.org/president/11202013.html, January 24, 2015.

CHAPTER

18

Hospital Dental Services
for Children and the Use
of General Anesthesia
s James A. Weddell, James E. Jones, and John D. Emhardt

For additional resources, please visit the

website.

CHAPTER OUTLINE
OBTAINING HOSPITAL STAFF
PRIVILEGES
INDICATIONS FOR GENERAL
ANESTHESIA IN THE TREATMENT
OF CHILDREN
PSYCHOLOGICAL EFFECTS OF
HOSPITALIZATION ON CHILDREN
OUTPATIENT VERSUS INPATIENT
SURGERY

MEDICAL HISTORY AND PHYSICAL
EXAMINATION
ADMISSION TO THE HOSPITAL
OPERATING ROOM PROTOCOL
PROPERTIES OF INHALATION
GENERAL ANESTHETICS
ANESTHETIC PREPARATION OF THE
CHILD
Time-Out Protocol

D

entists can provide essential services to patients
within an operating room setting in addition to
providing consultative and emergency services.
Staff membership is necessary. National commissions
such as the Joint Commission (formerly the Joint Commission on Accreditation of Healthcare Organizations
[JCAHO]) issue the standards for hospital governance for
all hospital services. Ambulatory surgery centers (ASCs)
also offer operating room facilities and may be accredited
by organizations focused solely on outpatient care, such
as the Accreditation Association for Ambulatory Health
Care (AAAHC). Staff membership is required as well.
In recent years, with the increasing number of general
practice residencies and postdoctoral specialty programs,
the qualified dentist finds that staff privileges in a facility
offering operating room resources are a necessity. Active
involvement in hospital dentistry has added a rewarding
component to the practices of many dentists. Many hospitals have incorporated not only dental specialties but
also general dental services, providing a comprehensive
health care facility in which to serve the community.

OBTAINING HOSPITAL STAFF PRIVILEGES
Requirements for obtaining hospital staff privileges vary
among institutions. The dentist must fulfill the following
three basic requirements to become a hospital staff member:
  
1.	The applicant must have graduated from an accredited dental school.
2.	The applicant must be licensed to practice dentistry in
the state in which the facility is located.
3.	The applicant must have high moral and ethical
standards.
  
328

PERIORAL CLEANING, DRAPING,
AND PLACEMENT OF
PHARYNGEAL THROAT PACK
RESTORATIVE DENTISTRY IN THE
OPERATING ROOM
COMPLETION OF THE PROCEDURE
End Time-Out Protocol
POSTANESTHESIA CARE UNIT
POSTOPERATIVE CARE

Additional requirements may have to be met to obtain
staff privileges. Many hospitals ask staff members to sign
a “Delineation of Privileges” form indicating the procedures that staff members are qualified to perform and that
are accepted by the governing body of the hospital. The
applicant must show proof of professional liability insurance, and, in many hospitals, specialty board certification
is required.
In a children’s hospital, dentists might be required to
have adequate advanced training to treat and manage
children in the hospital. The requirements may include a
dental residency of 1 to 3 years in a teaching hospital in
which the dentist (1) gains experience in recording and
evaluating the medical history and current medical status
of children; (2) receives instruction in physical examination techniques and in recognition of conditions that
may influence dental treatment decisions; (3) learns to
initiate appropriate medical consultations when a problem arises during treatment; (4) learns the procedure for
admitting, monitoring, and discharging children; and (5)
develops proficiency in operating room protocol. A rotation in which the dental resident was actively involved
in administering general anesthesia to children is highly
desirable. Current certification in basic cardiopulmonary
resuscitation should be maintained by all members of the
hospital’s professional staff, including dentists. It is highly desirable to have participated in a pediatric advanced
life support (PALS) course as well.
As active members of the hospital staff, dentists should
be aware of the hospital’s bylaws, rules, regulations, and
meetings. A copy of the bylaws should be obtained for
easy reference. Fully understanding the responsibilities
of staff membership will enable dentists to treat their

Chapter 18

n

Hospital Dental Services for Children and the Use of General Anesthesia

­patients within the established protocol of the institution.
Full participation in the active staff includes willing
participation in necessary committee work, such as credentialing or operations committees, so that the pediatric dentist will be well informed as to the needs and
expectations of his/her colleagues. Most important, dentists should endeavor to provide the highest-quality care
within the specialty area for which they are trained. The
American Academy of Pediatric Dentistry encourages the
participation of pediatric dentistry practitioners on hospital medical-dental staffs, recognizes the American Dental
Association as a corporate member of the Joint Commission, and encourages hospital member pediatric dentists
to maintain strict adherence to the rules and regulations
of the policies of the hospital medical staff.

INDICATIONS FOR GENERAL ANESTHESIA
IN THE TREATMENT OF CHILDREN
The use of general anesthesia for dental care in children is
sometimes necessary for safe, efficient, and effective care.
Depending on the patient, this will be done in an ambulatory care setting or inpatient hospital setting. It should
be only one component of the dentist’s overall treatment regimen. Oral hygiene and preventive care must be
implemented at the onset of treatment with parents or
guardians and patients in order to eliminate the cause of
the dental problem.
The safety of the patient and practitioner, as well
as the need to diagnose and treat, must justify the use
of general anesthesia. All available management techniques, including acceptable restraints and sedation,
should be considered before the decision is made to use a
general anesthetic. Crespi and Friedman cite several authors who agree in recommending that at least one or
two attempts be made using conventional behavior management techniques or conscious sedation before general
anesthesia is considered.1 Patient restraints should be
used only after consideration of the possibility for psychological trauma. In the event that conscious sedation
is necessary, a qualified and credentialed sedation team
must be utilized. Parental or guardian written consent
must be obtained before administering general anesthesia. Documentation regarding dental treatment needs,
unmanageability in the dental setting, and contributory
medical problems must be included in the patient’s hospital record. Records must be clearly written so others are
able to read and understand them. The introduction of
the electronic medical record has improved the issue of
legibility of written notes; however, the simple retrieval
of pertinent medical information or the writing of required orders may be more difficult with such a system.
The practitioner must be able to appropriately utilize the
medical record system of the institution. Review organizations examine dental admissions for proper documentation in the hospital chart for insurance payment and
quality assurance purposes.
Patients for whom general anesthesia has been the
management technique of choice include the following:
  
1.	Patients unable to cooperate due to a lack of psychological or emotional maturity and/or those who have

329

a physical, mental, or medically compromising disability that precludes conscious sedation.
2.	Patients with dental restorative or surgical needs for
whom local anesthesia is ineffective because of acute
infection, anatomic variations, or allergy.
3.	The extremely uncooperative, fearful, anxious, physically resistant, or uncommunicative child or adolescent with substantial dental needs for whom there is
no expectation that the behavior will soon improve.
4.	Patients who have sustained extensive orofacial or
dental trauma and/or require significant surgical
­procedures.
5.	Patients requiring immediate, extensive comprehensive oral or dental needs.
6.	Patients requiring dental care for whom the use of
general anesthesia may protect the developing psyche
and/or reduce medical risks.
  
If the benefits of the procedure outweigh the risk of anesthesia, there are few if any contraindications to general
anesthesia. However, when a concern about the medical
condition exists, consultation with an anesthesiologist
would be desirable. Patients for whom general anesthesia
is usually contraindicated include those with a medical
contraindication to general anesthesia and healthy and
cooperative patients with minimal dental needs.

PSYCHOLOGICAL EFFECTS
OF HOSPITALIZATION ON CHILDREN
Hospitalization is a frequent source of anxiety for children. According to King and Nielson, 20% to 50% of children demonstrate some degree of behavioral change after
hospitalization.2 Separation of the child from the parent
appears to be a significant factor in posthospitalization
anxiety, although other causes are also documented. Allowing the parent to stay with the child during the hospitalization, and especially to be present when the child
leaves for and returns from surgery, can reduce anxiety
for the child and parent alike.
According to Camm and colleagues, postoperative behavioral changes reported by mothers of a limited sample
of children who received dental treatment with general
anesthesia in a hospital were similar to those observed
in children who received treatment under conscious sedation in a dental clinic.3 Mothers of children receiving
dental treatment with general anesthesia in a hospital
setting were found to experience more stress during the
procedure. Ways to decrease these stresses include the
following: providing a prior tour of the operating room
facility, informing the parents of the status of the child
during the procedure, and letting them know that “everything is all right.” Seventy-five percent of the children
receiving general anesthesia exhibited some type of behavioral change. Positive changes included less fuss about
eating, fewer temper tantrums, and better appetite. Negative changes included biting the fingernails, becoming
upset when left alone, being more cautious or avoiding
new things, staying with the parent more, needing more
attention, and being afraid of the dark. Ways to minimize
negative changes include (1) involving the child in the
operating room tour, (2) allowing the child to bring along

330

Chapter 18

n

Hospital Dental Services for Children and the Use of General Anesthesia

a favorite doll or toy, (3) giving preinduction sedation,
(4) providing a nonthreatening environment, (5) giving
postprocedure sedation as needed, and (6) allowing parents to rejoin their children as early as possible in the recovery area.
Some centers allow parents to be present at the induction of anesthesia. Usually the anesthesia is induced when
the child breathes anesthetic gases such as sevoflurane
and/or nitrous oxide through a face mask. As the child
becomes anesthetized, the parent is encouraged to provide calm, loving reassurance until the child is unaware of
the parent’s presence. For this technique to be effectively
utilized, it is mandatory that the operating room team be
comfortable with the parent’s presence and prepared to
care for the parent if he/she were to become distressed. It
is also critical that the parent be educated as to what to
expect as the child is anesthetized, including the possibility that the child may not readily accept the mask, that
the child’s breathing may become obstructed or “snory,”
or that the child’s eyes may display abnormal movements
as he/she enters the excitement stage of anesthesia. Parental presence can be especially helpful with the child
with autism spectrum disorder or with a child who refuses
or is resistant to oral sedation such as midazolam.
Another similar technique utilizes certified child life
therapists skilled in the application of distraction techniques and play therapy. These personnel must also be
educated as to their responsibilities during the induction
of anesthesia. Utilization of parental presence or child life
therapists can markedly reduce the requirement for oral
sedation and thus enhance facility throughput by avoiding any delays in medication administration, emergence
from anesthesia, or postoperative observation time required to meet discharge criteria.
To limit the severity and duration of psychological
disturbances, the dentist should strive to reduce parental apprehension concerning the operative procedure.
Because children often sense apprehension in their parents, effectively reducing the parents’ anxiety will put the
child more at ease. Thoroughly explaining the procedure,
describing the normal postanesthetic side effects, and familiarizing the child and parents with the hospital can
reduce postoperative anxiety.
Peretz and colleagues concluded that children treated
for early childhood caries under general anesthesia or
under conscious sedation at a very young age behaved
similarly or better in a follow-up examination approximately 14 months after treatment than at their pretreatment visit, as measured by the Frankl scale and by the
“sitting pattern.”4 Fuhrer and colleagues found that children were more likely to exhibit positive behavior at their
6-month recall appointment following dental treatment
for childhood caries under general anesthesia compared
with those treated under oral conscious sedation.5

OUTPATIENT VERSUS INPATIENT
SURGERY
During the past 30 years, the popularity of outpatient anesthesia and surgery has continued to increase. Currently,
more than 70% of all pediatric surgical and diagnostic

procedures are performed on an outpatient basis. The criteria for and advantages of ambulatory general anesthesia procedures are well recognized. The increasing cost of
inpatient hospital care, advances in anesthetic management, and quality assessment of patient care have led to
changes in preoperative and postoperative management
of many surgical procedures done under general anesthesia that were previously assumed to be possible only on
an inpatient basis. Ambulatory care is more expeditious,
better tolerated by both family and hospital teams, and
less traumatic for the patient. Development of freestanding ambulatory care surgical centers (i.e., same-day surgery centers) and hospital ambulatory surgical care areas
has decreased health care costs for consumers and thirdparty providers. The advances in perioperative anesthesia
care are related to the wider availability of more highly
qualified anesthesia care providers (board-certified anesthesiologists with pediatric subspecialty training) and
the availability of modern, safer, short-acting anesthetic
and adjuvant drugs and monitoring equipment. Several
studies have reported a significant decrease in anesthesiarelated morbidity and mortality in children over the past
2 decades.
Good patient selection is an important criterion for a
successful outpatient surgery program. A young child or
adolescent who requires a general anesthetic and is free
of any significant medical disorders (i.e., is categorized as
class I or II on the American Society of Anesthesiologists
[ASA] physical status classification—see Box 17-4) can be
considered a candidate for outpatient surgery. Certain patients with well-controlled chronic systemic diseases such
as asthma, diabetes, and congenital heart disease can also
be considered for outpatient anesthesia following prior
consultation with an anesthesiologist.
When outpatient surgery is planned, the child undergoes a complete preoperative evaluation, including a
comprehensive medical history and physical examination, anesthesia assessment, and limited hematologic
evaluation. Many medical facilities allow this preadmission preparation to be performed outside of the medical
outpatient treatment facility. Biery and associates suggest
that routine laboratory tests, such as urinalysis and complete blood count with indices and electrolyte levels, are
neither cost-effective nor necessary for patients in whom
the prior complete medical history and physical examination were unremarkable.6 Current recommendations for
preoperative laboratory examination are indicated only
if required for a patient’s comorbidities. ASA no longer
suggests required preoperative laboratory examination in
a patient without medical comorbidity.
As an outpatient, the child should be brought by the
parents to the hospital at least 1½ hours before the dental
surgery. The nursing staff will verify that all preoperative
instructions have been followed and that the appropriate
laboratory tests have been performed. Several hours after
the procedure is completed, the patient is released to the
parent or guardian. Postoperative instructions are given,
and a follow-up appointment is scheduled.
The dentist will be more responsible for team communication, physical assessment, management, and postoperative evaluation for outpatient procedures performed

Chapter 18

n

Hospital Dental Services for Children and the Use of General Anesthesia

under general anesthesia than for inpatient procedures.
To qualify for treatment, pediatric outpatient general anesthesia patients must have reliable parents or guardians.
For example, the parents must have transportation available to return the child to the hospital in case postoperative complications develop at home.
In some cases the management of the child in an
outpatient facility will be precluded by the patient’s co-­
morbidities. Accreditation guidelines from AAAHC do
not permit scheduling a case in an outpatient center
when it is certain that the patient will require postoperative observation in an outpatient facility. Some outpatient facilities have resources permitting a prolonged
observation period such as 23 hours, but many do not. In
this case the procedure would best be scheduled in a facility with the resources for postoperative inpatient hospitalization. The child should be treated as an inpatient
if a medical condition exists that requires close followup, if the child lives outside the general area of the hospital, or if the parents demonstrate questionable ability to
comply with preoperative or postoperative instructions.
In many instances, patients with medical or developmental disabilities and/or with multiple problems requiring lengthy dental treatment are not good candidates for
ambulatory care with general anesthesia. However, even
some of these patients can be managed in an ambulatory
setting when they are properly assessed and when no
postoperative complications are anticipated. Conditions
such as those listed in Table 18-1 commonly preclude an
outpatient procedure.

MEDICAL HISTORY AND PHYSICAL
EXAMINATION
Once the decision has been made that a general anesthetic would be preferable for a pediatric patient, the dentist
should evaluate the child’s medical history, the current
medical status, and the possibility of complications resulting from the procedure. This process is discussed in
Chapter 17 and the patient-classification categories are
shown in Box 17-4. The parents should be told of any potential complications, and their informed consent must
be obtained (Fig. 18-1).
Intraoperative medical complications of dental patients with and without disabilities undergoing general
anesthesia have been reported at 0% to 1.4%. In a survey
of 200 pediatric dental general anesthesia cases, Enger and
Mourino indicated that the most common postoperative
complications following general anesthesia in children
younger than the age of 5 years were vomiting, fever, and
sore throat.7 Treatment consisted of antiemetic medications for nausea with vomiting, ice chips for sore throat,
and acetaminophen (Tylenol) for fever. Common minor
reversible complications include pain, swelling, bleeding, separation anxiety, sleepiness, and iatrogenic trauma
(such as minor abrasion, burn, or laceration). A majority
of these will resolve within 2 weeks after the procedure.
Bradley and Lynch found that no significant long-term
complications resulting from anesthesia or operative procedures were observed in 100 patients with and without
disabilities.8

331

Table 18-1
Comorbidities Possibly Necessitating
Postoperative Hospital Observation
Respiratory:

Airway
History of difficult intubation or mask management
Craniofacial abnormality
Hypoplastic or retrognathic mandible
Apnea
Asthma, poorly controlled
Mediastinal lymphoma or mass
Cardiac:

Congenital heart disease, especially those with single
ventricle physiology
Cardiac transplant
Congestive heart failure
Pacemaker or implantable defibrillator
Reduced ejection fraction on echocardiography
Stenotic valve lesions (e.g., aortic stenosis)
Neurologic:

Chronic neuromuscular disease
Seizure disorder
Metabolic:

Diabetes, poorly controlled
Inborn errors of metabolism
Malignant hyperthermia
Mitochondrial myopathy
Morbid obesity
Coagulopathy:

Hemophilia
Von Willebrand’s
Medication or herbal therapy induced (aspirin is not a
contraindication)
Cancer:

ASA status greater than 3 (a patient with a severe systemic disease)
Patients with cardiac lesions repaired previously and/or appropriately
managed by a cardiologist may still be candidates for outpatient
management. These patients’ cases should be discussed with an
anesthesiologist.

The Joint Commission requires that all patients admitted to a hospital or treated under general anesthesia as
outpatients have a physical examination performed by a
physician or qualified dentist. The child’s physician must
therefore be consulted for the completion of a comprehensive medical history and physical examination (Box
18-1). If the physician is not a member of the hospital
staff, a staff physician should complete the medical history and physical examination before the child is admitted.
The dentist should perform a thorough intraoral examination and submit a record of the findings together with a

332

Chapter 18

n

Hospital Dental Services for Children and the Use of General Anesthesia

Figure 18-1 Sample of form similar to one that may be used to obtain parental consent for dental treatment of a child under

general anesthesia. (Courtesy of Indiana University Health, Riley Outpatient Center Surgery, LLC.)

Chapter 18

Hospital Dental Services for Children and the Use of General Anesthesia

n

333

SIGNATURES REQUIRED
1. If the patient is an adult (age 18 or over) – signature of patient; or, if the patient is incompetent, the guardian’s signature.
2. Minor patient (under age 18) – if emancipated (providing own support and living apart from the parents) patient’s signature.
If married, signatures of patient and spouse are required.
Otherwise, signature of parent or guardian is required.
3. In an emergency threatening the life or well-being of the patient, and if signatures as required above are not available, there
should be an entry in the chart documenting the emergency nature of the procedure and the need for prompt action,
attested by the signatures of two physicians. Also, the signature of the closest adult relative should be obtained, if available.

Figure 18-1, cont’d.

Box 18-1
Components of the Pediatric Medical History and Physical Examination for Admission to the
Hospital
A. Pediatric History
1.	Identification: age, gender, racial-ethnic profile
2.	Informant and estimate of reliability
3.	Problem leading to admittance
4.	History of present illness: date of onset, chronologic
description of illness, presence or absence of previous
similar episodes, treatment given prior to admittance
5.	Medical survey
a.	Immunization against diphtheria, pertussis, tetanus,
polio, measles, mumps, rubella
b.	Previous hospitalizations, operations, major
­illnesses, or injuries
c.	Allergies, including allergies to food and drugs
d.	Dietary history (younger than 2 years of age)
e.	Current medications
6.	Developmental status
a.	Infants younger than 2 years: statement regarding
motor and language development
b.	Preschool children: general statement regarding
development
c.	Children in school: statement regarding school
performance
7.	Family history
a.	Coagulation abnormalities
b.	Anesthesia complications

B. Physical Examination
1.	Vital signs: temperature, pulse, respiration, blood
pressure, oxygen saturation
2.	Measurements: weight, height, or length
3.	General observations: nutrition, color, distress
4.	Head: size and shape, description of fontanel if present
5.	Eyes: pupils, extraocular movements
6.	Ears: position and shape
7.	Airway: size of mouth and degree of opening,
­mobility of cervical spine and TMJ, size of mandible,
Mallampati score
8.	Nose: patency, secretions
9.	Mouth: teeth, tongue, pharynx, and tonsils
10.	Neck: masses, lymphadenopathy, range of motion
11.	Lungs: auscultation
12.	Cardiovascular system: heart sounds, rate, rhythm,
murmurs; pulses
13.	Abdomen: masses, distention
14.	Genitalia: male testes, female introitus
15.	Skin: rashes, bruises, lacerations
16.	Lymph nodes
17.	Skeleton: joints, spine, history of fractures
18.	Nervous system: state of consciousness, gait (if walking)
19.	Summary list of problems on tentative diagnosis

summary of the child’s dental history and the reason for
admission (Box 18-2). The hospital must be notified to reserve an appropriate surgical suite and a bed for the child.
Two weeks before admission or an outpatient dental surgery appointment, a letter containing general instructions
concerning the procedure, results of the dental examination, and pertinent dates and times should be mailed to
the parents.
In the event that a child is expected to be admitted for
hospital observation, it may be inappropriate to utilize an

ASC. AAAHC requires that a patient be cared for in the ASC
only if it is intended that the patient will be discharged to
home from the center. If hospital admission following a
procedure is anticipated or considered likely, that patient
should be cared for in a facility with the resources available for prolonged postoperative observation.
A dental procedure may be canceled before the administration of general anesthesia due to patient illness;
productive cough, rhinitis, or wheezing; failure to comply
with preoperative instructions such as abstention from

334

Chapter 18

n

Hospital Dental Services for Children and the Use of General Anesthesia

eating or drinking; or risks related to coexisting diseases.
Issues identified on preoperative contact with parents may
require a general anesthetic case to be rescheduled. The
risks of morbidity from the anesthesia must be weighed
against the risk of postponement.

ADMISSION TO THE HOSPITAL
Some patients presenting for elective surgery are brought
in on the day of surgery as an “AM admit.” In this instance the child may come to the hospital the same day as
the operative procedure and stay postoperatively until the

Box 18-2
Components of the Dental History
and Intraoral Examination to be Completed
before Hospitalization
1.	Past dental history
2.	Head and neck physical examination
a.	General
b.	Head
c.	Neck
d.	Face
e.	Lateral facial profile
3.	Intraoral examination
a.	Lips
b.	Tongue
c.	Floor of mouth
d.	Buccal mucosa
e.	Hard and soft palates
f.	Oropharynx
g.	Periodontium
4.	Teeth
a.	Caries
b.	Eruption sequence
c.	Occlusion molar, cuspid, overbite, overjet,
and midline
5.	Oral habits
6.	Behavior
7.	Recommendations

next morning or longer. The parents must complete the
necessary forms for admission to the hospital. The dentist must write the child’s admission orders, which give
the nursing staff the preliminary information needed and
outline the basic care procedures for the child. Modern
hospital practice includes consultation and discussion
with the hospitalist regarding the reasons for admission
and the potential postoperative concerns. This conversation should include the dentist, anesthesiologist, and
hospitalist and/or team who will be caring for the child
postoperatively. The nursing staff will explain standard
hospital procedures to the parents and make any recommendations needed to foster a comfortable experience for
the patient.
During this time, the child will be visited by the anesthesiologist involved in the anticipated procedure. The
anesthesiologist will assess the child’s present state of
health and review the past and present hospital records,
focusing on prior exposures to general anesthetics and
any complications that may have occurred. The anesthesiologist will explain the procedures involved during
his or her part of the procedure and answer any questions that the child or parent might have. The decision
regarding the length of time the child should refrain from
consuming solid foods and liquids before the procedure
is also determined by the anesthesiologist; time may vary
for younger patients, to prevent hypoglycemia (Fig. 18-2).
Before surgery, the dentist can answer any questions
the parents or the child might have. The dentist should
also evaluate the preoperative laboratory data so that appropriate consultations can be initiated if any abnormal
values are found. The dentist should record an admitting note in the medical chart to provide the supporting
staff with a concise record of the child’s medical history,
current medical and oral status, diagnosis, and proposed
treatment (Box 18-3). With the onset of paperless charting, abbreviations are not as common when information
is recorded in the medical chart. Modern hospital care
discourages the use of abbreviations because of the risk of
ambiguity. However, Box 18-4 is a list of common abbreviations one may encounter with medical chart review.
Thirty minutes before the dental procedure, the dentist
and the staff should be in the operating room area.

Outpatient NPO Guidelines*

.
.
.
.
.

Over one year of age
Clear liquids permitted until 3 hours prior to scheduled surgery
Breast milk until 4 hours prior to surgery
Formula, fortified breast milk, and solid food stopped at midnight**
**if the procedure is not to be done until after noon, dry cereal or toast and juice permitted until 0600
Clear liquids include water, apple juice, Gatorade, and Sprite. No Jello or broth after midnight.
A clear recipe specifying what foods or liquids are acceptable can minimize confusion on the day of the
procedure.

*These guidelines are utilized by the Riley Outpatient Center in Indianapolis, Indiana. These are based on factors unique to
the surgery center, permit some leeway in the case of changes in the schedule, and are consistent with recommendations of the
American Society of Anesthesiologists (Anesthesiology 2011; 114:495-511).

Figure 18-2 Nothing by mouth (nil per os [NPO]), times according to age. (Courtesy of Indiana University Health, Riley

Outpatient Center Surgery, LLC.)

Chapter 18

n

335

Hospital Dental Services for Children and the Use of General Anesthesia

Box 18-3

OPERATING ROOM PROTOCOL

Components of Dentist’s Admitting Note
on the Medical History-Physical: Progress
Note Form

All persons involved in the care of patients in the operating room must follow Occupational Safety and Health
Administration (OSHA) guidelines. They must wear appropriate attire designed to prevent contamination of the
surgical suite, hallways, and recovery room. This generally consists of a shirt, pants or skirt, and coverings for the
face, head, and feet. A hood is used to cover all unshaven
facial hair. Eyeglasses, goggles, or a face shield must be
used to protect the surgeon’s eyes, and a mask must cover
the mouth and nose. Hand hygiene measures must be followed. These include alcohol-based hand-rubbing before
and after any patient contact.
The dentist and staff should be familiar with the standard scrub technique for sterile procedures. Neither the
medical nor the dental literature documents that a sterile
technique is more advantageous than a modified sterile, or
clean, technique for restorative dental procedures. Therefore intraoral dental procedures are generally considered

1.	Name, age, gender, race, chief complaint, and rationale for admission
2.	History of the present illness
3.	Past medical history
4.	Present medications (list all with dosages and times
given)
5.	Results of current laboratory tests
6.	Documentation of informed consent and physical
examination
7.	Impression of case (intraoral examination, diagnosis,
and prognosis)
8.	Plan for treatment
9.	Dentist’s signature

Box 18-4
Abbreviations Commonly Used in the Hospital
a.c.
ad lib.
anom
AP
aq.
BP
BRP
BUN
bx
c
C
Caps.
CBC
CC
CNS
cong
CP
CV
d/c
Dent
Diff
disch
D5W
Dx
ECG
Elix
ER
FHx
FUO
Fx
GA
ging
Hr
Hct
HEENT

Before meals (ante cibos)
At liberty or at pleasure
Anomalies
Anteroposterior
Aqueous, water
Blood pressure
Bathroom privileges
Blood urea nitrogen
Biopsy
With (cum)
Celsius (formerly centigrade)
Capsule
Complete blood count
Chief complaint
Central nervous system
Congenital
Cerebral palsy
Cardiovascular
Discontinue
Dental
Differential blood count
Discharge
5% dextrose in water
Diagnosis
Electrocardiogram (also EKG)
Elixir
Emergency room
Family history
Fever of unknown origin
Fracture
General anesthesia or (gen an)
Gingiva
Hour
Hematocrit
Head, eyes, ears, nose, and throat

Hg
Hx
HPI
h.s.
I&D
IM
I&O
IV
kg
Mand
Max
M
MCH
MCHC
MCV
Med
norm
neg
N2O
NPO
NSA
n/v
op
OPD
OR
PA
p.c.
PE (or Px)
Ped
PH
PMH
p.o.
postop
preop

Mercury
History
History of present illness
Just before sleep (hora somni)
Incision and drainage
Intramuscular
Intake and output
Intravenous
Kilogram
Mandible
Maxilla
Molar, in moles
Mean corpuscular hemoglobin
Mean corpuscular hemoglobin concentration
Mean corpuscular volume
Medication
Normal
Negative
Nitrous oxide
Nothing by mouth (nil per os)
No significant abnormality
Nausea and vomiting
Operation
Outpatient department
Operating room
Posteroanterior
After meals (post cibos)
Physical examination
Pediatric
Past history
Past medical history
By mouth (per os)
Postoperative
Preoperative
Continued

336

Chapter 18

n

Hospital Dental Services for Children and the Use of General Anesthesia

Box 18-4
Abbreviations Commonly Used in the Hospital—cont’d
prep
prn
pro Time
Pt
PT
PTT
Px
q
qs
R/O
ROS
RR
RR
RSR
Rx
s
SBE
Subq
SH

Prepare
As required (pro re nata)
Prothrombin time
Patient
Physical therapy
Partial thromboplastin time
Physical examination
Every (quaque)
Sufficient quantity (quantum sufficit)
Rule out
Review of symptoms
Respiratory rate
Recovery room
Regular sinus rhythm
treatment (or prescription)
Without (sine)
Subacute bacterial endocarditis
Subcutaneous
Social history

Hep
S/P
Stat
rect
surg
Sx
tbsp
TPR
Tx
UA
WBC
WD
W/F
W/M
WN
WNL
w/o

clean procedures rather than sterile procedures. However, the dentist should wear sterile gloves. A sterile gown
is worn at the discretion of the dentist. The barrier technique should be followed to prevent cross-contamination
between and among patients in the hospital.

PROPERTIES OF INHALATION GENERAL
ANESTHETICS
All inhalation anesthetic agents produce anesthesia by
depressing specific areas of the brain. The magnitude of
depression is proportional to the partial pressure of the
inhalation agents reaching specific sites in the central nervous system (CNS) after entering through the lungs and
being distributed by the circulation to the tissues. The resulting physiologic signs of CNS depression produced by
general anesthetic agents have been described by Guedel
and modified by Roberts as stages of anesthesia with ether
(Fig. 18-3).9,10 Guedel’s classification of the stages of anesthesia is largely of historical interest, however. Modern
inhaled anesthetics are extremely potent. Induction of
anesthesia occurs quickly, and passage through the stages
of anesthesia is quite rapid.
Techniques of inhalation anesthesia vary with the type
of equipment used (i.e., reservoir bag, directional valves),
chemical absorption of expired carbon dioxide, and rebreathing of expired gases. The techniques range from
insufflation to open or nonbreathing systems, semiopen
systems, semiclosed systems, and closed systems. The
semiclosed “circle” system is most often used in modern
anesthesia. Exhaled gases mingle with fresh gas and are
rebreathed after all the carbon dioxide is removed by a
chemical absorber. Inhaled gases are humidified, and a
reservoir bag or ventilator allows for assisted respiration.
Reduced loss of body heat and water vapor, increased

Hepatitis
Status post
At once (statim)
Rectal
Surgery
Signs and symptoms
Tablespoon
Temperature, pulse, and respiration
Treatment
Urinalysis
White blood count
Well developed
White female
White male
Well nourished
Within normal limits
Without

Stage 1

Plane 1
Plane 2

Relative
analgesia

Plane 3

Total
analgesia

Stage 2

Excitement

Stage 3

Plane 1
Plane 2
Plane 3
Plane 4

Stage 4

Respiratory paralysis

The stages of
anesthesia

Surgical
anesthesia

Figure 18-3 Stages of anesthesia observed with ether.

(Adapted from Roberts GJ: Relative analgesia in clinical practice. In Coplans MD, Green RA, eds. Anaesthesia and sedation in dentistry, vol 12, Amsterdam, 1983, Elsevier Science.)

economy of flow, and decreased environmental contamination are advantages of the low-flow semiclosed system.
An anesthetic’s potency is defined as the concentration of the agent required to inhibit response to a standard surgical stimulus. The potency is expressed in terms
of the minimal alveolar concentration (MAC) value for
the agent. The MAC of a given agent will abolish the
response to stimulus in 50% of patients. Expressed as a
number, MAC values are additive when different agents
are used in combination. MAC is useful in that it provides an estimate of the anesthetic requirement for each
patient. Fine adjustment of anesthetic administration can
then be made by monitoring the patient’s physiologic responses (e.g., heart rate, blood pressure, and respiratory
rate). Commonly used inhalation anesthetics in children
include nitrous oxide, isoflurane, desflurane, and sevoflurane. Each of these is useful in different applications. Nitrous oxide is the least soluble of the anesthetic gases that

Chapter 18

n

Hospital Dental Services for Children and the Use of General Anesthesia

promote a rapid onset and offset of effect. It is odorless
and also the least potent. The other anesthetic gases are
modern, nonflammable halogenated ethers. Desflurane is
the least soluble halogenated volatile anesthetic. It has a
rapid onset and offset; however, its utility is limited by
its noxious odor. Sevoflurane is also quite insoluble but
not as much as desflurane. It is widely used because its
odor is non-noxious and it can be safely used to induce
an anesthetic in an awake patient. Isoflurane is the oldest
and most soluble of the halogenated anesthetic vapors in
clinical use. It is more noxious than sevoflurane and has a
slower onset and offset compared with those of the other
gases. Its utility is mainly in the area of maintenance of
anesthesia.
In children, to avoid the trauma of establishing intravenous access while awake, anesthesia is commonly
induced by inhalation of a halogenated volatile anesthetic via a face mask. Due to its non-noxious odor,
halothane (a halogenated alkane) has enjoyed widespread popularity for decades as an induction agent
in children. Sevoflurane became available in 1995; in
comparison with halothane, it is less soluble (producing more rapid induction and emergence) and is associated with less myocardial depression and fewer and
less significant respiratory problems when used for
inhalational induction. Like halothane, it has a nonnoxious odor. As a result, sevoflurane has become the
agent of choice for inhalational induction. (Halothane
is still used in other parts of the world, but is not in
wide clinical use in the United States.) Following induction of anesthesia, intravenous access is established.
For maintenance of anesthesia, sevoflurane, isoflurane,
and desflurane are all acceptable.
Intraoperative and postoperative anesthetic management is best accomplished by dentist-administered local
anesthesia in addition to the general anesthesia. By the
use of appropriate local anesthesia, the postoperative pain
medication requirements will be lessened, thus minimizing potential opioid-induced side effects. Because general
anesthesia is associated with a significant incidence of
postoperative emesis, antiemetic agents such as ondansetron and dexamethasone may be administered intraoperatively to prevent this occurrence.

ANESTHETIC PREPARATION
OF THE CHILD
TIME-OUT PROTOCOL
After donning operating room attire, the dentist should
report to the surgical suite and inform the anesthesiologist of any special requests concerning the procedure
before the induction of anesthesia. When the patient
enters the operating room, the mandatory “time-out
protocol” initiated by the circulating nurse identifies
the patient, allergies, planned medications, and proposed treatment to the dentist and anesthesiologist
before induction, for the child’s safety (Fig. 18-4). Nasotracheal intubation is preferred to ensure good access
to the oral cavity. However, a history of epistaxis or
certain medical comorbidities may make nasotracheal

337

intubation relatively contraindicated. One technique
for nasal endotracheal intubation utilizes a latex-free
red rubber catheter to serve as an atraumatic dilation
device to prevent the passage of the hollow-pointed endotracheal tube through the nasopharyngeal tissues.11
This typically is done without the instillation of a topical vasoconstrictor such as neosynephrine. Oral tracheal intubation is not contraindicated, however, and
can be used in a dental case with minimal restorative
needs. In this event the anesthesiologist will typically
place the endotracheal tube to the least-affected side
of the oral cavity first and then move it to the other
side after treatment of disease not obscured by the tube
is completed. One must recognize that complications
related to the administration of general anesthesia (i.e.,
laryngospasm, tooth avulsion or aspiration, traumatic
intubation, compromised airway, malignant hyperthermia) are possible and may require expert management
by the anesthesiologist.
The anesthesiologist is responsible for starting intravenous fluids, securing the necessary monitoring equipment,
performing the intubation, and stabilizing the endotracheal
tube. The anesthesiologist will select the type of intravenous fluid, calculate the estimated fluid replacement and
fluid deficit volumes, and perform a physical assessment of
dehydration. The monitoring equipment should include
(1) an automatic sphygmomanometer, (2) electrocardiographic leads, (3) a temperature-monitoring device, (4) a
pulse oximeter, and (5) a capnography device. The anesthesiologist must confirm that the child is in stable condition
prior to the onset of the dental operation (Fig. 18-5).
Special care is taken to protect the child’s eyes (Fig. 18-6).
In addition, a shoulder roll is placed, padding is added to
the patient’s pressure points, the endotracheal tube and
head are stabilized, heating or cooling blankets are used
as needed, and the safety belt is secured. The dentist has
the table positioned to conduct dental procedures, and
the anesthesiologist administers any preoperative intravenous medications requested.
Before scrubbing, the dentist should obtain any necessary preoperative radiographic studies. All persons involved in the radiologic procedure should wear protective lead apparel. Radiographs of excellent quality can be
made while a patient is under general anesthesia without
exposing the patient or staff to unnecessary radiation
(Fig. 18-7). Digital radiographs are advantageous because
radiation exposure is decreased and image feedback is immediate.

PERIORAL CLEANING, DRAPING,
AND PLACEMENT OF PHARYNGEAL
THROAT PACK
Before the dental procedure is begun, the perioral area
is cleansed with sterile 4 × 4-inch gauze pads. The first
gauze pad is saturated with a bacteriostatic cleansing
agent and the second with sterile water. Alcohol is not
used in the operating room because it is a potential fire
hazard (Fig. 18-8). This procedure is intended not to sterilize the area but only to remove gross debris (Fig. 18-9).
A surgical sheet is then positioned over the remainder

338

Chapter 18

n

Hospital Dental Services for Children and the Use of General Anesthesia

Figure 18-4 Universal protocol checklist. (Courtesy of Indiana University Health, Riley Outpatient Center Surgery, LLC.)

Chapter 18

n

Hospital Dental Services for Children and the Use of General Anesthesia

339

mouth should be fully exposed (Fig. 18-10). The anesthesiologist may request that part of the nasotracheal
tube remain exposed so that all connections can be easily monitored. The assistants then place all supporting
carts and stands around the table in positions that the
dentist finds comfortable and efficient (Fig. 18-11).
The patient’s mouth is opened with the aid of a molt
mouth prop. Care should be taken not to impinge on the
lips or tongue with the prop (Fig. 18-12). The mouth is
thoroughly aspirated. The pharyngopalatine area is sealed
off with a strip of moist 3-inch sterile gauze approximately 12 to 18 inches long (Fig. 18-13). Written documentation of throat pack placement and removal is required
on the physical history form of the medical chart. This
packing reduces the escape of anesthetic agents and prevents any material from entering the pharynx. The gauze
should be tightly packed around the tube so that a good
seal is ensured (Video 18-1: Throat pack placement). Once
the pack is in place, a thorough intraoral examination is
performed, followed by dental prophylaxis. The dentist
should then evaluate any new radiographic studies that
have been obtained and formulate a final treatment plan.

RESTORATIVE DENTISTRY
IN THE OPERATING ROOM

Figure 18-5 Patient is in a stable anesthetic condition and

ready for the dental procedure. Notice the position of the precordial stethoscope, blood pressure cuff, and orotracheal tube.

Figure 18-6 Special eye guard protects the patient’s eyes

during the procedure.

of the child’s body. This helps maintain body temperature and provides a clean field during the procedure.
The head is draped with three towels arranged to form
a triangular access space for the mouth. The towels are
secured in place with towel clamps or hemostats. The

Instruments used for restorative dental procedures in the
operating room are the same as those for procedures in
the dental operatory. Local anesthesia may be used to
minimize pain and bleeding. The use of local anesthesia can decrease the anesthetic requirements or need for
postoperative opiate analgesia and thus decrease postoperative side effects such as nausea. The use of quadrant
isolation with a rubber dam is preferred (Fig. 18-14). After
the completion of all dental procedures, a topical fluoride varnish should be applied before the throat pack is
removed. Documentation of dental procedures, extracted
teeth, sutures, blood loss, and hydration in the medical
chart is required.
Restorative dental care under general anesthesia allows
for excellent patient compliance and the easy achievement of a well-lighted field, and therefore increases the
quality and quantity of dental care while decreasing the
anxiety level for the clinician and patient during dental
treatment. Spiro and Burns found that they were able
to treat seven teeth per hour in children under general
anesthesia compared with only three teeth per hour in
children of similar age in a clinic setting.12 Eidelman and
associates reported that the quality of restorative treatment performed was better under general anesthesia than
under conscious sedation.13
The dentist should place restorations that will provide
the greatest longevity with the least amount of maintenance, for example, full-coverage stainless steel crowns
rather than large amalgam restorations on posterior primary teeth. In a 3-year study of comprehensive dental
cases treated under general anesthesia, O’Sullivan and
Curzon found stainless steel crowns to be significantly
more successful (3% failure rate) than amalgam or composite restorations (29% failure rate).14 A 6-month retrospective study by Tate and colleagues to assess the failure

340

Chapter 18

n

Hospital Dental Services for Children and the Use of General Anesthesia

Figure 18-7 Obtaining diagnostic radiographs. Notice the use of protective lead gloves, gown, and apron.

Figure 18-8 Materials required for perioral cleaning. Clockwise from upper left: pharyngeal throat pack, towel clamps, patient

drapes, bacteriostatic cleaning agent, sterile water, and alcohol.

rates of dental restorative procedures performed under
general anesthesia by pediatric dental residents found
stainless steel crowns to be best (8%), followed by amalgam (21%) and composite (30%); composite strip crowns
(51%) had the lowest successful restorative treatment
rate.15 In a 6- to 27-month postoperative period following
general anesthesia, Al-Eheideb et al. reported similar values, with stainless steel crowns (95.5%) being more successful than amalgams or composite restorations (50%).

In their review, pulpotomies had an extremely high success rate (97.1%), whereas sealants were retained only
68.3% of the time.16 In a 30-month longevity study of
over 1000 composite restorations completed in the operating room, Bücher and colleagues noted a high success rate (81.5%).17 In another study of composite strip
crowns, Kupietzky and co-workers found them to be aesthetic and durable, with an 88% overall retention rate after 6 months.18

Chapter 18

n

Hospital Dental Services for Children and the Use of General Anesthesia

341

Intraoperative anesthesia complications (e.g., dislodged
or obstructed endotracheal tube; intravenous infiltrates or
disconnects; nasal bleeding or edema; abrasion; laceration
of the tongue, lips, or mucosa; and arrhythmias) and extraoral complications (e.g., perioral abrasions, swellings,
or lacerations) rarely occur. Care should be taken by the
dentist not to displace the endotracheal tube and to minimize contact with the perioral tissues when possible. Priority is given by the dentist to the anesthesiologist to treat
any adverse event quickly, even to the point of stopping
treatment and removing rubber dams to allow access.

COMPLETION OF THE PROCEDURE
END TIME-OUT PROTOCOL

Figure 18-9 Special care must be taken during perioral

cleaning to prevent materials from entering the oral cavity.

The anesthesiologist should be notified 10 minutes before the completion of the procedure so that the child
can begin to be aroused and preparations can be made
for extubation. The recovery room personnel are notified
that the child will soon be arriving so that they can begin
preparations. On completion of the dental procedure, the
oral cavity is thoroughly debrided, and the throat pack is
removed carefully to prevent aspiration of any materials
that might be lodged against it. The “end time-out protocol” is called by the circulating nurse to identify any
patient safety concerns (see Fig. 18-4). The dentist verbalizes a needle-and-sponge count and removal of the throat
pack to the nurse. The anesthesiologist then brings the
patient through emergence, and the trachea is extubated.
The dentist should remain in the operating room during
the extubation process to assist the anesthesiologist if
necessary. When the child is transported to the recovery

Figure 18-10 Placement of the surgical sheet and triangular draping of the oral cavity area. The nasotracheal tube is exposed

to allow for easy monitoring of its connections.

342

Chapter 18

n

Hospital Dental Services for Children and the Use of General Anesthesia

room, the dentist should accompany the anesthesiologist
and provide assistance during the transportation.

POSTANESTHESIA CARE UNIT
When the child arrives in the postanesthesia care unit or recovery room, the dentist should inform the nursing staff of
the procedures accomplished and of any special requests or
instructions. If teeth have been removed, the nurse should
be specifically instructed how and where to apply gauze
packs for hemostasis. The nurses and other medical staff are
available to deal with immediate postoperative complications (e.g., fever, nausea, vomiting, croup, hypoxia, bleeding, and laryngospasm) if they occur. After the dentist has
confirmed that the airway is patent and the vital signs are
stable, and after the anesthesiologist is confident the child
is recovering well, the dentist should meet with the parents
or guardian to provide a brief report of the child’s condition and a review of the treatment. The parents or guardian of inpatients should be informed of the approximate
time the child will be reunited with them. The parents or
guardian of outpatients should be informed if events have
occurred indicating that the child should be observed in
the hospital. Prescriptions may be written for pain control
agents (e.g., acetaminophen with hydrocodone, ibuprofen
suspension), antibiotics (e.g., amoxicillin, clindamycin), or

antiemetics for nausea (e.g., prochlorperazine, ondansetron
[Zofran]). It should be noted that codeine is not routinely
prescribed because of an association with death in patients
at risk for postoperative airway obstruction or apnea. Codeine has also been found to be ineffective in a significant
part of the population because of an enzyme deficiency
that prevents its metabolism to the active form.

POSTOPERATIVE CARE
Postoperative orders and the operative note for the staff
should be completed by the dentist and recorded in the
medical chart while the child is in the postanesthesia care
unit (Figs. 18-15 and Box 18-5). Transfer orders may be
used for individuals requiring more specialized care than
the pediatric dentist usually provides (see Fig. 18-15, C).
The operative report should be dictated as soon after the
completion of the procedure as possible (Box 18-6).
If the child was treated as an outpatient, once the child
is awake and alert, displays appropriate behavior, maintains his or her own airway, has stable vital signs, has no
uncontrolled bleeding or pain, is voiding, and has no retention of liquids, the child could be discharged rather
than kept overnight for further evaluation. The facility
may have a list of discharge criteria to facilitate this decision (Fig. 18-16). If the child is to be kept for a 23-hour

A
Figure 18-11 A, Schematic drawing of one example of the positioning of personnel and equipment in the operating room. IV,

intravenous.

Continued

Chapter 18

n

Hospital Dental Services for Children and the Use of General Anesthesia

343

B

C
Figure 18-11, cont’d B, Operating room positions of the staff while performing the necessary dental procedures. From left:

Dental assistant, dental surgeon, anesthesiologist, assistant dental surgeon, and circulating nurse. C, Sitting position in operating room. From left: Dental surgeon, dental assistant (anesthesiologist is out of the picture to the left).

observation, an appropriate note is recorded in the medical chart, and a discharge summary is dictated (Box 187) after the child is released. Postoperative instructions
and necessary prescriptions are given to the parents or
guardian, and a predischarge observation appointment
for the child is arranged. The dentist must be available
that evening (a contact number must be given) in the
event the parents or guardian needs assistance in caring
for the child after returning home. These instructions and

prescriptions help the patient deal with common complications after discharge, such as fever, nausea, vomiting,
pain, and bleeding.
Effective communication is essential at this time to
reaffirm the parents’ or guardian’s cooperation in performing oral health care and in keeping follow-up observation appointments and recall appointments. Enger
and Mourino reported that only 57% of dental patients
undergoing a treatment in the operating room returned

344

Chapter 18

n

Hospital Dental Services for Children and the Use of General Anesthesia

Figure 18-12 Positioning of a mouth prop. Special care is

taken not to impinge on the lips or tongue with the prop.

Figure 18-13 Placement of the pharyngeal throat pack.

for 6-month recall visits,7 and suggested that procedures requiring monitoring (i.e., space maintenance) be
postponed if the patient’s return is unlikely. In a study
of patients needing repeat dental treatment in the operating room, Sheller et al. found the best outcomes to
result from aggressive treatment of caries, active patient
follow-up, and education of parents.19 Common patient
characteristics included the following: 100% with carious
involvement of maxillary central incisors, most central
incisors were nonrestorable, the child was still using a
bottle at the time of the operating room procedure, the
child is responsible for brushing his/her own teeth, the

Figure 18-14 Rubber dam isolation of the maxillary left

quadrant.

child showed poor cooperation in medical/dental setting,
the child had a difficult personality as described by the
parent, the social situation was dysfunctional, and follow-up care was lacking.
A study by Almeida et al. of future caries susceptibility
in children with early childhood caries (ECC) following
dental treatment under general anesthesia found that,
despite implementation of increased preventive measures
for these children, they were still highly predisposed to
greater caries incidence in later years.20 The researchers
concluded that more aggressive preventive therapies may
be required in children who experience ECC.
There are several categories of dental problems in children who cannot be handled well in the office setting
and are best managed in the hospital or outpatient surgery center. The ability to treat children in the hospital
environment and to provide comprehensive dental care
using a general anesthetic for such children is a valuable
part of the dentist’s treatment regimen. Granting hospital
staff privileges to qualified dentists has become routine at
many hospitals seeking to provide comprehensive health
care for the community. The dentist who uses the hospital or outpatient surgery center for the care of patients
often finds it to be a rewarding component of practice.
Following dental treatment under general anesthesia, Anderson et al. found that dental patient complaints of pain,
problems with eating, sleeping, and behavioral concerns
showed significant improvement, thereby improving
their quality of life.21

Chapter 18

n

Hospital Dental Services for Children and the Use of General Anesthesia

Outpatient Orders
1.
2.
3.
4.

PACU care per protocol.
Discontinue IV when released from PACU.
Begin clear liquids in day surgery.
Pain medication: Acetaminophen ______mg po q4h prn
pain (10-15 mg/kg/ standard dose. Hydrocodone (7.5 mg
with acetaminophen 325 mg/15mL solution), po q6h for
moderate to severe pain (typical dose 0.15 mg/kg).
Antibiotics (if indicated); amoxicillin__mg if not allergic to
penicillins, clindamycin__mg, if allergic to penicillins.
Call dental house officer at ___________ if questions.
Release from day surgery when discharge criteria are met.
Return appointment.
Call if problems arise.

5.
6.
7.
8.
9.

Officer number _____________
Pager number ______________
Signature__________________

A

Inpatient Orders
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.

Admit to ____________ to Dr. ________________ Service.
Allergies.
Vital signs q2h x 2, then q4h x 2, then q8h.
Continuous pulse oximetry x 24h.
Head of bed elevated 30 degrees.
Protective stabilization, if needed.
Encourage oral fluids.
Advance to soft diet as tolerates.
Medications: list all meds, dosage, times given.
Pain medication: Acetaminophen _____mg po q4h prn pain (typical dose
10-15 mg/kg).
Hydrocodone (7.5mg with acetaminophen 325 mg/15mL solution),
po q6h for moderate to severe pain (typical dose 0.15 mg/kg).
Nausea medication (if indicated): Ondansetron____mg po or IV prn
nausea (0.1-0.2 mg/kg, max dose 4 mg).
IV fluids: D5 1/2 ns + 20 meq KCL or Lactated Ringer's (LR) solution
at___ (typical maintenance fluid rate = 4 mL/kg for patients <10kg for
patients >30 kg).
Antibiotics (if indicated); amoxicillin___mg if not allergic to penicillins, clindamycin___mg, if allergic to penicillins.
Apnea monitor, if indicated.
For oral swelling–apply ice pack to area for 30 minutes.
Check for oral bleeding q15 min x 1 hr. If needed, apply moist 4 x 4 sterile
gauze to area with pressure.
Call if needed.

11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.

B

345

Transfer Medical Orders
1.

Transfer to pediatric medical service: Dr. MD
pager number______________.
2. Vital signs per PACU protocol.
3. Change intravenous fluids per pediatric medical
service.
4. Encourage clear liquids.
5. Advance to soft diet as tolerated.
6. Monitor for oral hemorrhage for 24 hours. Apply
moist sterile gauze and pressure, if necessary. Call
dentist for excessive hemorrhage or swelling.
7. Medications per pediatric medical service.
8. Continue additional medications per prescription:
i.e., mild pain—acetaminophen or ibuprofen
suspension;
moderate pain—hydrocodone with acetaminophen
elixir
Antibiotic—amoxicillin; allergy clindamycin
Nausea—ondansetron.
9. Give and review appropriate home care instructions,
and return appointment with family prior to discharge.
10. For dental questions contact: Dr. __________ pager
number____________.

C

_____________________
Dentist Signature

Officer number _____________
Pager number ______________
Signature__________________

Figure 18-15 Components of the dentist’s postoperative orders for a patient. A, Inpatient orders. B, Outpatient orders.

C, Transfer medical orders.

346

Chapter 18

n

Hospital Dental Services for Children and the Use of General Anesthesia

Box 18-5

Box 18-7

Components of the Dentist’s Operative Note

Components of the Dentist’s Discharge
Summary Statement

1.	Title of dental procedure
2.	Type of intubation and anesthesia used
3.	Teeth restored
4.	Teeth extracted
5.	Other procedures completed
6.	Dental prophylaxis and topical fluoride used
7.	Summary (e.g., length of procedure, how the child
tolerated the procedure, blood loss, complications)
8.	Prognosis
9.	Dentist’s signature

Box 18-6
Components of the Dentist’s Operative Report
1.	Doctor’s and assistants’ names
2.	Patient’s name and hospital number
3.	Preoperative diagnosis
4.	Postoperative diagnosis
5.	Title of the operative procedure
6.	Preparation for anesthesia (preoperative medications, type of intubation, and anesthetic agents
used)
7.	Surgical procedure
a.	Radiographs taken
b.	Description of scrub, draping procedure,
and throat pack
c.	Number of teeth restored and type of
­restorations
d.	Number of teeth receiving pulp therapy
e.	Teeth extracted (name each)
f.	Gingival therapy procedures
g.	Band(s) for appliance(s) and impression(s)
h.	Dental prophylaxis and fluoride applied
i.	Types and amounts of intraoperative fluids used
j.	Other information (if indicated)
8.	Estimated blood loss and hemostasis
9.	Condition of the patient at the conclusion of the
surgical procedure (complications incurred if
­indicated)
10.	Condition of the patient on arrival in the recovery
room
11.	Prognosis

1.	Patient’s name and hospital number
2.	Date of admission
3.	Date of discharge
4.	Date of dictation
5.	Preoperative diagnosis
6.	Postoperative diagnosis
7.	Age, race, and gender of patient
8.	Reason for admission and treatment using general
anesthetic
9.	Results of preoperative history and physical
­examination (medical and dental) and present
­medications
10.	Name of the physician completing the history and
physical examination
11.	Complete description of the surgical procedure (see
Box 15-6)
12.	Patient’s tolerance in the recovery room and ward
13.	Condition of patient on discharge
14.	Individual to whom patient is discharged
15.	Home care instructions given to parents or guardian
and medications prescribed (dosage and times to be
given)
16.	Patient’s next appointment
17.	Copies of discharge summary sent to patient’s
­physician and referring dentist or physician

Chapter 18

n

Hospital Dental Services for Children and the Use of General Anesthesia

ROC SURGERY LLC
Perioperave Care Center
Riley Outpaent Surgery Center (ROC)
Discharge Criteria to the Care of a Responsible Adult
Policy
Readiness for discharge from the Day Surgery Unit is based on nursing assessment and meeng pre-set
discharge criteria.
Criteria for Discharge from SDS (or PACU) to Home
Assess the paent's readiness for discharge based on the following criteria:
1. Heart rate, respiratory rate, and blood pressure are within 10% of preoperave values. SaO2 is >95
or at preoperave value. Owing to the nature of the pediatric paent, many paents may be upset
upon admission to the point that vital signs are not representave of their baseline. In this
situaon, the first set of vital signs from the OR will be used.
2. Respiraons are unlabored and breath sounds are equal and consistent with the preoperave
examinaon.
3. Dressing is intact with minimal or no drainage present and/or incision is free of fresh drainage.
4. Paent is tolerang oral fluids with no nausea or voming unless physician has made an excepon
to this.
5. Paent is alert when awake or at preoperave level of funcon.
6. Older child is able to speak clearly or at preoperave level and infant has a clear cry.
7. Pain is controlled.
8. Paent’s motor funcon has returned to baseline or is at an expected level consistent with the
surgical or anesthec management.
9. All postoperave orders have been addressed and completed where applicable.
10. Return appointments have been made if applicable.
11. Anesthesiologist has been nofied of and/or has examined any child with prolonged emesis or
croup.
12. Paent has discharge order signed by surgeon and anesthesiologist.

Figure 18-16 Discharge criteria for post-OR dental patient. (Courtesy of Indiana University Health, Riley Outpatient Center

Surgery, LLC.)

347

348

Chapter 18

n

Hospital Dental Services for Children and the Use of General Anesthesia

REFERENCES
1.	Crespi P, Friedman RB: Hospitalization for the pediatric dental patient: an update on admission indications and third
party review, N Y State Dent J 52(2):40–43, 1986.
2.	King KJ, Nielson RR: Dental treatment in the hospital utilizing general anesthesia. In Nowak AJ, editor: Dentistry for the
handicapped patient, St. Louis, 1976, Mosby.
3.	Camm JH, et al.: Behavioral changes of children undergoing
dental treatment using sedation versus general anesthesia,
Pediatr Dent 9(2):111–117, 1987.
4.	Peretz B, et al.: Children with baby bottle tooth decay treated
under general anesthesia or sedation: behavior in a followup visit, J Clin Pediatr Dent 24(2):97–101, 2000.
5.	Fuhrer CT, et al.: Effect on behavior of dental treatment rendered under conscious sedation and general anesthesia in
pediatric patients, Pediatr Dent 31:492–497, 2009.
6.	Biery KA, Shamaskin RG, Campbell RL: Analysis of preoperative laboratory values prior to outpatient dental anesthesia,
Anesth Prog 34:58–60, 1987.
7.	Enger DJ, Mourino AP: A survey of 200 pediatric dental general anesthesia cases, J Dent Child 52(1):36–41, 1985.
8.	Bradley GS, Lynch S: Safety of hospital dental treatment for
the high-risk patient, Spec Care Dentist 4(6):253–260, 1984.
9.	Guedel AE: Inhalation anesthesia, New York, 1937, Macmillan.
10.	Roberts GJ: Relative analgesia in clinical practice. In Coplans
MD, Green RA, editors: Anaesthesia and sedation in dentistry,
vol. 12. Amsterdam, 1983, Elsevier Science.
11.	Ray TL, Tobias JD: An alternative technique for nasotracheal
intubation, South Med J 96(10):1039–1041, 2003.
12.	Spiro SR, Burns J: Current concepts of premedication and anesthesiological management for the pediatric dental patient
who is hospitalized for dento-oral rehabilitation, J Hosp Dent
Pract 14(1):35–39, 1980.
13.	Eidelman E, Faibis S, Peretz B: A comparison of restorations
for children with early childhood caries treated under general anesthesia or conscious sedation, Pediatr Dent 22:33–37,
2000.
14.	O’Sullivan EA, Curzon MEJ: The efficacy of comprehensive
dental care for children under general anesthesia, Br Dent J
171:56–58, 1991.

15.	Tate AR, et al.: Failure rates of restorative procedures following dental rehabilitation under general anesthesia, Pediatr
Dent 24(1):69–71, 2002.
16.	Al-Eheideb AA, Herman NG: Outcomes of dental procedures
performed on children under general anesthesia, J Clin Pediatr Dent 27:181–183, 2003.
17.	Bücher K, et al.: Longevity of composite restorations in patients with early childhood caries (ECC), Clin Oral Investig
18(3):775–782, 2013.
18.	Kupietzky A, Waggoner WF, Galea J: The clinical and radiographic success of bonded resin composite strip crowns for
primary incisors, Pediatr Dent 25:577–581, 2003.
19.	Sheller B, et al.: Reasons for repeat dental treatment under
general anesthesia for the healthy child, Pediatr Dent 25:
546–552, 2003.
20.	Almeida A, et al.: Future caries susceptibility in children with
early childhood caries following treatment under general anesthesia, Pediatr Dent 22(4):1–5, 2000.
21.	Anderson HK, et al.: Changes in aspects of children’s oral
health related quality of life following dental treatment under
general anesthesia, Int J Paediatr Dent 14(5):317–325, 2004.

SUGGESTED READINGS
American Academy of Pediatric Dentistry: Special Issue: Reference manual 2013-2014, Pediatr Dent 35(7 suppl):84–85, 86,
181–184, 2013.
American Society of Anesthesiologists: Practice Guidelines for
Preoperative Fasting and the Use of Pharmacologic Agents
to Reduce the Risk of Pulmonary Aspiration; Application to
Healthy Patients Undergoing Elective Procedures, Anesthesiology 114:495–511, 2011.
Herlich A, et al.: Anesthesia for pediatric dentistry. In Smith’s
Anesthesia for Infants and Children, ed 8, St. Louis, 2011,
Mosby.
VanCleave AM, et al.: Factors involved in dental surgery fires: a
review of the literature, Anesth Prog 61:21–25, 2014.
VanCleave AM, et al.: The effect of intraoral suction on oxygenenriched surgical environments: a mechanism for reducing
the risk of surgical fires, Anesth Prog 61:155–161, 2014.

PART

4

CHAPTER

19

GROWTH AND DEVELOPMENT

Eruption of the Teeth: Local,
Systemic, and Congenital
Factors That Influence the
Process
s Jeffrey A. Dean and Erwin G. Turner

For additional resources, please visit the

website.

CHAPTER OUTLINE
CHRONOLOGIC DEVELOPMENT
AND ERUPTION OF THE TEETH
Influence of Premature Loss of
Primary Molars on Eruption Time
of Their Successors
Variations in Sequence of Eruption
LINGUAL ERUPTION OF
MANDIBULAR PERMANENT
INCISORS
TEETHING AND DIFFICULT
ERUPTION

Eruption Hematoma (Eruption Cyst)
Eruption Sequestrum
Ectopic Eruption
NATAL AND NEONATAL TEETH
EPSTEIN PEARLS, BOHN NODULES,
AND DENTAL LAMINA CYSTS
LOCAL AND SYSTEMIC FACTORS
THAT INFLUENCE ERUPTION
Ankylosed Teeth
Ankylosis of Primary Molars with
Absence of Permanent Successors

CHRONOLOGIC DEVELOPMENT
AND ERUPTION OF THE TEETH
A variety of developmental defects that are evident after eruption of the primary and permanent teeth can be
­related to systemic and local factors that influence matrix
formation and the calcification process. Thus it is important that the dentist be able to explain to the parents the
time factors related to the early stages of tooth calcification both in utero and during infancy.
Past classic studies and reviews of the literature involving calcification of the primary teeth have compared their
findings with the values in Table 19-1 showing the Logan
and Kronfeld chronology of the human dentition, which
has been the accepted standard for many years.1 Their
findings offered revisions that established earlier ages
than those previously accepted for initial calcification
and later ages at which the primary teeth erupt.
These studies and reviews concluded that Table 19-1
should be modified and that the sequence of calcification

Ankylosed Permanent Teeth
Trisomy 21 Syndrome (Down
Syndrome)
Cleidocranial Dysplasia
Hypothyroidism
Hypopituitarism
Achondroplastic Dwarfism
Other Causes

of the primary teeth should be changed to central incisor, first molar, lateral incisor, canine, and second molar.
They determined that the times of initial calcification of
the primary teeth are 2 to 6 weeks earlier than those given
in Table 19-1, and they also concluded that the maxillary teeth are generally ahead of the mandibular teeth in
development. Exceptions are the second molars, which
generally are advanced in the mandible, and the lateral
incisors and canines, which at times may be ahead in the
mandible.
These studies also propose that the lateral incisor, first
molar, and canine tend to erupt earlier in the maxilla than
in the mandible, compared with the Logan and Kronfeld
table, which suggests that eruption in the mandible is
generally ahead of that in the maxilla. The ages at which
primary teeth erupt are 2 or more months later than suggested in the Logan and Kronfeld table. The study by Hernandez and colleagues provides confirmation that more
recent studies in different white populations have findings
similar to those from these classic studies on eruption
349

350

Chapter 19

n

Eruption of the Teeth: Local, Systemic, and Congenital Factors That Influence the Process

Table 19-1
Chronology of the Human Dentition
Tooth

Hard Tissue Formation
Begins

Amount of Enamel
Formed at Birth

Enamel Completed

Eruption

Root Completed

4 mo in utero
4½ mo in utero
5 mo in utero
5 mo in utero
6 mo in utero

Five sixths
Two thirds
One third
Cusps united
Cusp tips still isolated

1½ mo
2½ mo
9 mo
6 mo
11 mo

7½ mo
9 mo
18 mo
14 mo
24 mo

1½ yr
2 yr
3¼ yr
2½ yr
3 yr

4½ mo in utero
4½ mo in utero
5 mo in utero
5 mo in utero
6 mo in utero

Three fifths
Three fifths
One third
Cusps united
Cusp tips still isolated

2½ mo
3 mo
9 mo
5½ mo
10 mo

6 mo
7 mo
16 mo
12 mo
20 mo

1½ yr
1½ yr
3¼ yr
2¼ yr
3 yr

4-5 yr
4-5 yr
6-7 yr
5-6 yr
6-7 yr
2½-3 yr
7-8 yr
12-16 yr

7-8 yr
8-9 yr
11-12 yr
10-11 yr
10-12 yr
6-7 yr
12-13 yr
17-21 yr

10 yr
11 yr
13-15 yr
12-13 yr
12-14 yr
9-10 yr
14-16 yr
18-25 yr

4-5 yr
4-5 yr
6-7 yr
5-6 yr
6-7 yr
2½-3 yr
7-8 yr
12-16 yr

6-7 yr
7-8 yr
9-10 yr
10-12 yr
11-12 yr
6-7 yr
11-13 yr
17-21 yr

9 yr
10 yr
12-14 yr
12-13 yr
13-14 yr
9-10 yr
14-15 yr
18-25 yr

Deciduous dentition
Maxillary

Central incisor
Lateral incisor
Cuspid
First molar
Second molar
Mandibular

Central incisor
Lateral incisor
Cuspid
First molar
Second molar
Permanent dentition
Maxillary

Central incisor
Lateral incisor
Cuspid
First bicuspid
Second bicuspid
First molar
Second molar
Third molar

3-4 mo
10-12 mo
4-5 mo
1½-1¾ yr
2-2¼ yr
At birth
2½-3 yr
7-9 yr

Sometimes a trace

Mandibular

Central incisor
Lateral incisor
Cuspid
First bicuspid
Second bicuspid
First molar
Second molar
Third molar

3-4 mo
3-4 mo
4-5 mo
1¾-2 yr
2¼-2½ yr
At birth
2½-3 yr
8-10 yr

Sometimes a trace

From Kronfeld R: Bur 35:18-25, 1935 (based on research by WHG Logan and R Kronfeld); adapted by Kronfeld R, Schour I: J Am Dent Assoc
26:18-32, 1939; further adapted by McCall JO, Wald SS: Clinical dental roentgenology: technic and interpretation including roentgen studies of the
child and young adult, Philadelphia, 1940, WB Saunders.

chronology.2 Their findings are further substantiated by
the recent study conducted by Hu et al.3 An example of
these modifications to the Logan and Kronfeld table may
be found in the Dental Growth and Development section
of the American Academy of Pediatric Dentistry Reference
Manual.4
The time of eruption of both primary and permanent
teeth varies greatly. Variations of 6 months on either side
of the usual eruption date may be considered normal for
a given child. A study by Parner and colleagues compared
the well-known general acceleration of the physical development of children over the past century with their own
observations of the emergence of permanent teeth.5 They
found that the emergence of permanent teeth has not

been subject to a similar acceleration; in fact, the mean
age of eruption has increased slightly, but only by a few
days per year. They conclude that the age of eruption of
the permanent teeth is a much more stable phenomenon
than other aspects of physical development in children.
Numerous in vivo animal experiments and human
­radiographic studies have been done to better understand
the process of tooth eruption. Although many theories
have been advanced, the factors responsible for the eruption of the teeth are not fully understood. The factors that
have been related to the eruption of teeth include elongation of the root, forces exerted by the vascular tissues
around and beneath the root, growth of the alveolar bone,
growth of dentin, growth and pull of the periodontal

Eruption of the Teeth: Local, Systemic, and Congenital Factors That Influence the Process

membrane, hormonal influences, presence of a viable dental follicle, pressure from the muscular action, and resorption of the alveolar crest.
A series of experiments by Cahill and Marks established that a viable dental follicle is required for tooth
eruption.6 Further studies by Marks and Cahill resulted in the conclusion that “tooth eruption is a series
of metabolic events in alveolar bone characterized by
bone resorption and formation on opposite sides of the
dental follicle and the tooth does not contribute to this
process.”7
Tooth eruption is influenced by pituitary growth hormone and thyroid hormone, and parathyroid hormone–
related protein is required for tooth eruption.
Each tooth starts to move toward occlusion at approximately the time of crown completion, and the interval
from crown completion and the beginning of eruption
until the tooth is in full occlusion is approximately 5
years for permanent teeth.
Many investigators have observed that tooth emergence appeared to be more closely associated with the
stage of root formation than with the chronologic or
skeletal age of the child. By the time of clinical emergence, ­approximately three fourths of root formation has
­occurred, with the teeth reaching occlusion before the
root development is complete.
Demirjian and Levesque presented a large sample of
5437 radiographs from a homogeneous (French-Canadian) population.8 They used this sample to investigate
the gender differences in the development of permanent
mandibular teeth from the early stages of calcification
to closure of the apex. The analysis of the developmental curves of individual teeth shows a common pattern,
namely, the similarity in timing between the genders
for the early stages of development. For the first stages
of crown formation, which they refer to as A, B, and
C, there was no difference between boys and girls in
the chronology of dental calcification in the majority
of teeth. For the fourth stage, D, which represents the
completion of crown development, girls were more advanced than boys by an average of 0.35 year for four
teeth. For the stages of root development, the mean difference between the genders for all teeth was 0.54 year;
the largest difference was for the canine (0.90 year).
Analysis of the data from Demirjian and Levesque show
the importance of sexual dimorphism during the period
of root development rather than during the period of
crown development.8
The tooth eruption process is clearly complex, and
many different mechanisms are undoubtedly involved.
Some of the leading scientists who are contributing to a
better understanding of the tooth eruption process have
written review articles to help consolidate the facts and
theories associated with this process. A review article
by Wise and colleagues focuses on the molecular signals that initiate tooth eruption.9 The researchers state
that tooth eruption is a complex and tightly regulated
process that involves cells of the tooth organ and the
surrounding alveolus. Mononuclear cells (osteoclast
precursors) must be recruited into the dental follicle before the onset of eruption. These cells, in turn, fuse to

351

Signaling pathway—Recruitment of mononuclear cells to DF
Alveolar
bone

Osteoclast
Fusion

Dental
follicle
Enhances

EGF
Stellate
reticulum

Recruitment

Mononuclear
cells

MCP-1

Recruitment

CSF-1

Enhances

CSF-1 mRNA

MCP-1 mRNA
Enhances
Enhances

TGF-1

Enhances

IL-1

Enhances

n

Enhances

Chapter 19

PTHrP

Figure 19-1 Paracrine signaling between the stellate

r­ eticulum and dental follicle (DF) results in the synthesis
and secretion of chemotactic molecules, colony-stimulating
factor 1 (CSF-1), and monocyte chemotactic protein 1
(MCP-1) for recruitment of mononuclear cells. EGF, Epidermal growth factor; IL-1α, interleukin 1α; PTHrP, parathyroid
hormone–related peptide; mRNA, messenger RNA; TGF-β1,
transforming growth factor β1. (From Wise GE et al: Crit Rev
Oral Biol Med 13(14):323-355, 2002.)

form osteoclasts that resorb alveolar bone, creating an
eruption pathway for the tooth to exit its bony crypt.
In recent years, knowledge of the biology of tooth eruption has greatly increased. What has emerged is the realization that interactions of osteoblasts, osteoclasts, and
dental follicles involve a complex interplay of regulatory genes that encode various transcription factors,
proto-oncogenes, and soluble factors. For the clinician
faced with treating both simple and complex dental
complications arising from abnormal tooth eruption,
knowledge of the basic molecular mechanisms involved
is essential (Fig. 19-1). Finally, an extensive review by
Marks and Schroeder analyzes experimental data to
identify the b
­ asic principles of tooth eruption and offers
their guiding theories of the process.10 For more information about the details of the tooth eruption process,
refer to these review articles.

INFLUENCE OF PREMATURE LOSS OF PRIMARY
MOLARS ON ERUPTION TIME OF THEIR
SUCCESSORS
After reviewing the records of children in the Burlington
study who had undergone unilateral extraction of primary molars, Posen came to the following conclusions:
Eruption of the premolar teeth is delayed in children who
lose primary molars at 4 or 5 years of age and before.11
If extraction of the primary molars occurs after the age
of 5 years, there is a decrease in the delay of premolar
eruption. At 8, 9, and 10 years of age, premolar eruption
resulting from premature loss of primary teeth is greatly
accelerated. Hartsfield stated that premature loss of teeth
associated with systemic disease usually results from some
change in the immune system or connective tissue.12

352

Chapter 19

n

Eruption of the Teeth: Local, Systemic, and Congenital Factors That Influence the Process

The most common of these conditions appears to be hypophosphatasia and early-onset periodontitis.

VARIATIONS IN SEQUENCE OF ERUPTION
The mandibular first permanent molars are often the first
permanent teeth to erupt. They are quickly followed by
the mandibular central incisors. Previous studies found
little or no clinical significance to the eruption of the incisors before the molars.
After analyzing serial records of 16,000 children in
Newburgh and Kingston, New York, Carlos and Gittelsohn concluded that the average eruption time of the
mandibular central incisors was earlier than that of the first
molars by about 1½ months in both boys and girls.13 Of
considerable interest was the gender difference in the
eruption sequence of permanent teeth. The mandibular canine erupted before the maxillary and mandibular
first premolars in girls. In boys, the eruption order was
reversed—the maxillary and mandibular first premolars
erupted before the mandibular canine.
Moyers stated that the most common sequence of
eruption of permanent teeth in the mandible is first molar, central incisor, lateral incisor, canine, first premolar,
second premolar, and second molar.14 The most common sequence for the eruption of the maxillary permanent teeth is first molar, central incisor, lateral incisor,
first premolar, second premolar, canine, and second molar (Fig. 19-2). He identified these common sequences in
each arch to be favorable for maintaining the length of
the arches during the transitional dentition.
It is desirable that the mandibular canine erupt before the first and second premolars. This sequence aids
in maintaining adequate arch length and in preventing
lingual tipping of the incisors, which not only causes a
loss of arch length but also allows an increased overbite
to develop. An abnormal lip musculature or an oral habit that causes a greater force on the mandibular incisors
than can be compensated for by the tongue allows the anterior segment to collapse. For this reason, use of a passive
lingual arch appliance is often indicated when the primary
canines have been lost prematurely or when the sequence
of eruption is undesirable.
A deficiency in arch length can occur if the mandibular second permanent molar develops and erupts before
the second premolar. Eruption of the second permanent

7

1
7

1

6

5

2

3

6

4

5

4

3

2

Figure 19-2 Desirable eruption sequence for the permanent

teeth.

molar first encourages mesial migration or tipping of the
first permanent molar and encroachment on the space
needed for the second premolar. The importance of
maintaining the second primary molar until its replacement by the second premolar is discussed in Chapter 22.
In the maxillary arch, the first premolar ideally should
erupt before the second premolar, and they should be
followed by the canine. The untimely loss of primary
molars in the maxillary arch, which allows the first permanent molar to drift and tip mesially, results in the permanent canine’s being blocked out of the arch, usually
to the labial side.
The position of the developing second permanent
molar in the maxillary arch and its relationship to the
first permanent molar should be given special attention.
Its eruption before the premolars and canine can cause
a loss of arch length, just as in the mandibular arch.
The eruption of the maxillary canine is often delayed
because of an abnormal position or deviations in the
eruption path. This delayed eruption should be considered along with its possible effect on the alignment of
the maxillary teeth. The significance of the sequence of
the eruption of permanent teeth is considered further
in Chapter 22.
Finally, deviations from accepted norms of eruption
time are often observed in clinical practice. Premature
eruption has been noted, but delayed tooth eruption is
the most commonly encountered deviation from normal
eruption time.15

LINGUAL ERUPTION OF MANDIBULAR
PERMANENT INCISORS
The eruption of mandibular permanent incisors lingual to
retained primary incisors is often a source of concern for
parents. The primary teeth may have undergone extensive root resorption and may be held only by soft tissues.
In other instances, the roots may not have undergone
normal resorption and the teeth remain solidly in place.
It is common for mandibular permanent incisors to erupt
lingually, and this pattern should be considered essentially normal. It is seen both in patients with an obvious arch
length inadequacy (Fig. 19-3) and in those with a desirable amount of spacing of the primary incisors (Fig. 19-4).
In either case the tongue and continued alveolar growth
seem to play important roles in influencing the permanent
incisors into a more normal position with time. Although
there may be insufficient room in the arch for the newly
erupted permanent tooth, its position will improve over
several months. In some cases there is justification for
removal of the corresponding primary tooth. Extraction
of other primary teeth in the area is not recommended,
however, because it will only temporarily relieve the
crowding and may even contribute to the development
of a more severe arch length inadequacy.
Gellin has emphasized the anxiety created when parents discover a double row of teeth. He suggested that if
the condition is identified before 7½ years of age, it is
unnecessary to subject the child to the trauma of removing the primary teeth, because the problem almost always
self-corrects within a few months.16 However, he warned

Chapter 19

n

Eruption of the Teeth: Local, Systemic, and Congenital Factors That Influence the Process

that when lingually erupted permanent mandibular incisors are seen in an older child and the radiograph shows
no root resorption of the primary teeth, self-correction
has not been achieved and the corresponding primary
teeth should be removed.
Gellin and Haley conducted a clinical study to
determine whether removal of the corresponding pri­
mary tooth is necessary when the lingual eruption pattern of the mandibular permanent incisor is identified.17
They monitored 57 lingually positioned mandibular permanent central or lateral incisors in 44 children (22 boys
and 22 girls). The children were selected for the study if
they had one or more permanent mandibular incisors
erupting immediately lingual to the corresponding primary incisor. Other inclusion criteria were the presence
of both primary mandibular canines, the absence of any
other anomalies of the mandibular primary or permanent
incisors, and the absence of severe crowding of the permanent mandibular incisors characterized by eruption
of the lateral incisors directly behind the central incisors.
The mean age of the children at their first observation was
6 years 4 months (range, 4 years 10 months to 8 years 8
months). Of the permanent teeth studied, 47 were central
incisors and 10 were lateral incisors.

353

In all cases, labial migration occurred naturally and
e­xtraction of the corresponding primary incisor was
­unnecessary. Gellin and Haley reported that spontaneous
correction of lingually erupted mandibular permanent
central incisors occurred by age 8 years 2 months in 95%
of the cases that met the criteria of their study.17 They also
observed that spontaneous correction of lingually erupted
lateral incisors occurred by at least 8 years 4 months of age.
Although the sample of the lateral incisors was too small
for specific conclusions to be drawn, correction occurred
in all cases and central incisors migrated labially at an earlier age. Gellin and Haley recommended a ­conservative
approach of waiting and periodic observation to spare the
child a surgical procedure. They suggested that if labial
migration of the permanent incisor has not occurred by 8
years 2 months for central incisors and 8 years 4 months
for lateral incisors, over-retention of the primary incisor
should be suspected, and removal of the primary tooth
considered. However, they recommended removal only if
the primary incisor remained firm and the root had failed
to resorb. These findings and suggestions were further substantiated by the study conducted by Aminabadi et al.18

A
A

B

B

Figure 19-3 A, The permanent central incisors are erupting

Figure 19-4 A, Primary teeth are desirably spaced with suf-

lingual to the retained primary central incisors, which were
extracted. B, The arch length is inadequate to accommodate the permanent incisors. However, they have moved
forward into a more favorable position as a result of the
force exerted on them by the tongue.

ficient room for the permanent central incisors. However, the
permanent teeth erupted lingually to the primary teeth. B,
Extraction of the primary central incisors resulted in a desirable positioning of the permanent teeth, but given enough
time this condition probably would have been self-correcting.

354

Chapter 19

n

Eruption of the Teeth: Local, Systemic, and Congenital Factors That Influence the Process

We recognize that spontaneous correction of lingually
erupted permanent incisors is likely to occur given enough
time, particularly in cases in which there is not severe
crowding. A watchful waiting approach may be justified,
especially when the patient is first seen in the dentist’s
office for this specific problem. Removal of a tooth during the first dental appointment of a child 6 to 8 years
old probably compromises the dentist’s ability to develop
rapport with the child. However, the ­extraction procedure
in such cases is quite simple, and we believe there may be
many times when it is appropriate. The parents’ feelings
should not be ignored in the decision; even a 95% chance
that correction will occur may not satisfy all parents. The
dentist may find that some dental patients prefer to have
the primary tooth extracted and the problem laid to rest.
Although monitoring the condition without extraction is
acceptable under the conditions outlined by Gellin and
Haley, we know of no significant contraindications to
early removal of the offending p
­ rimary incisor even in
spaced dentitions, if specific conditions warrant its consideration.
Even when mandibular permanent incisors erupt
­uneventfully, they often appear rotated and staggered in
position. The molding action of the tongue and the lips
improves their relationship within a few months.

TEETHING AND DIFFICULT ERUPTION
In most children the eruption of primary teeth is preceded by increased salivation, and the child will want to put
the hand and fingers into the mouth—these observations
may be the only indication that the teeth will soon erupt.
Some young children become restless and fretful during the time of eruption of the primary teeth. Many conditions, including croup, diarrhea, fever, convulsions,
primary herpetic gingivostomatitis, and even death have
been incorrectly attributed to eruption. In the nineteenth
century, complications from teething were believed to
be a frequent cause of infant mortality. Several previous
studies have reported that, in 1839, 5016 deaths in England and Wales were attributed to teething.
Illingworth made a thorough search of the world literature and failed to produce evidence that teething causes
fever, convulsions, bronchitis, or diarrhea.19 His findings
are supported by Tasanen’s unique study of teething, in
which 192 tooth eruptions were observed in 126 infants
and 107 control children.20 All the babies were seen on
the day of tooth eruption, and records were kept of the
temperature, incidence of infection, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, white blood cell count, behavior (including
sleep), color of the mucosa, sensitivity of the tissue covering the erupting tooth, and pain resulting from pressure on the tooth. Tasanen concluded that teething does
not increase the incidence of infection, does not cause
any rise in temperature, erythrocyte sedimentation rate,
or white blood cell count, and does not cause diarrhea,
cough, sleep disturbance, or rubbing of the ear or cheek,
but that it does cause daytime restlessness, an increase in
the amount of finger sucking or rubbing of the gum, an
increase in drooling, and possibly some loss of appetite.
In one third of the children, there was no change in the

color of the mucosa in the area of the erupting tooth; in
one third, the change was slight; and in the remaining
third, there was a pronounced change in the mucosa, often with small hemorrhages.
A later study of 46 healthy infants conducted by ­Jaber
and colleagues demonstrated a small increase in body
temperature in 20 (43%) of the infants on the day of
emergence of their first tooth.21 However, the authors
emphasized a danger in attributing fever to teething.
Macknin and colleagues have confirmed these results.22
Serious mistakes have been made in the health care of
infants and toddlers when their symptoms were ascribed
to teething without a thorough diagnostic evaluation,
which resulted in the overlooking of significant systemic
disturbances. Swann observed 50 children who were hospitalized after parents or physicians initially attributed
their symptoms to teething.23 After a careful medical
evaluation, an organic cause of illness was identified in
48 of the 50 ­patients.
Because the eruption of teeth is a normal physiologic
process, the association with fever and systemic disturbances is not justified. A fever or respiratory tract infection during this time should be considered coincidental
to the eruption process rather than related to it.
Inflammation of the gingival tissues before complete
emergence of the crown may cause a temporary painful
condition that subsides within a few days. The surgical
removal of the tissue covering the tooth to facilitate eruption is not indicated. If the child is having extreme difficulty, the application of a nonirritating topical anesthetic
may bring temporary relief. The parent can apply the
anesthetic to the affected tissue over the erupting tooth
three or four times a day. Several low-dose products specifically formulated for infants are available without prescription. Caution must be exercised, however, when one
is prescribing topical anesthetics, especially for infants,
because systemic absorption of the anesthetic agent is
rapid, and toxic doses can occur if the product is misused.
The parent must clearly understand the importance of using the drug only as directed. The eruption process may
be hastened if the child is allowed to chew on a piece of
toast or a clean teething object.

ERUPTION HEMATOMA (ERUPTION CYST)
A bluish-purple elevated area of tissue, commonly called
an eruption hematoma, occasionally develops a few weeks
before the eruption of a primary or permanent tooth. The
blood-filled cyst is most frequently seen in the primary
second molar or the first permanent molar region. This
fact substantiates the belief that the condition develops as
a result of trauma to the soft tissue during function (Fig.
19-5). Usually the tooth breaks through the tissue within a few days, and the hematoma subsides. Because the
condition is almost always self-limiting, treatment of an
eruption hematoma is rarely necessary. However, surgical
uncovering of the crown may occasionally be justified.
When the parents discover an eruption hematoma,
they may fear that the child has a serious disease such as a
malignant tumor. The dentist must be understanding and
sensitive to their anxiety while reassuring them that the
lesion is not serious.

Chapter 19

n

Eruption of the Teeth: Local, Systemic, and Congenital Factors That Influence the Process

Figure 19-5 Eruption hematomas (arrows) have developed

before the eruption of the second primary molars.

355

Figure 19-6 Arrow points to an eruption sequestrum in

a girl 5 years, 11 months of age. It appears clinically as a
white spicule of hard tissue overlying the central fossa of a
mandibular first permanent molar, which is just beginning
to erupt through the mucosa. (Courtesy Drs. Paul E. Starkey
and William G. Shafer.)

ERUPTION SEQUESTRUM
The eruption sequestrum is occasionally seen in children
at the time of the eruption of the first permanent molar
(Figs. 19-6 and 19-7). Starkey and Shafer have described
the sequestrum as a tiny spicule of nonviable bone overlying the crown of an erupting permanent molar just
before or immediately after the emergence of the tips of
the cusps through the oral mucosa.24 Case studies have
reported that eruption sequestra are composed of dentin and cementum as well as a cementum-like material
formed within the follicle. These findings have been confirmed by the work of Alexandra de Queiroz and associates.25 Maki and colleagues also report that the ratio of
calcium to phosphorus in their case report was higher
than that seen in normal osseous tissue.26 These various
reports suggest that eruption sequestra may develop from
either osteogenic or odontogenic tissue. Regardless of its
origin, the hard tissue fragment is generally overlying the
central fossa of the associated tooth, embedded, and contoured within the soft tissue. As the tooth erupts and the
cusps emerge, the fragment sequestrates.
Eruption sequestra are usually of little or no clinical
significance. It is probable that some of these sequestra
spontaneously resolve without noticeable symptoms.
However, after an eruption sequestrum has surfaced
through the mucosa, it may easily be removed if it is causing local irritation. The base of the sequestrum is often
still well embedded in gingival tissue when it is discovered, and application of a topical anesthetic or infiltration
of a few drops of a local anesthetic may be necessary to
avoid discomfort during removal.

ECTOPIC ERUPTION
Arch length inadequacy, tooth mass redundancy, or a variety of local factors may influence a tooth to erupt or try
to erupt in an abnormal position. Occasionally this condition may be so severe that actual transposition of teeth
takes place. Several problems associated with the ectopic
eruption of teeth and the management of these problems
are presented in Chapter 22.

Figure 19-7 Radiographic appearance of an eruption

sequestrum (arrow) in a child 6 years, 9 months of age. No
treatment is required unless symptoms develop. (Courtesy
Drs. Paul E. Starkey and William G. Shafer.)

NATAL AND NEONATAL TEETH
The prevalence of natal teeth (teeth present at birth) and
neonatal teeth (teeth that erupt during the first 30 days)
is low. Leung conducted a retrospective study of hospital
records of 50,892 infants born in Calgary, Alberta (Canada).27 These records identified 15 infants found to have
natal teeth, a prevalence of 1 in 3392 births. In another
survey Kates and colleagues found the calculated prevalence of natal teeth to be 1 in 3667 among 11,000 infants
when the survey information was obtained indirectly;
however, in a group of 7155 infants actually examined,
the prevalence was found to be 1 in 716.28
Zhu and King conducted an extensive review of the
literature of reported cases of natal and neonatal teeth.29
They found that about 85% of natal or neonatal teeth are
mandibular primary incisors, and only small percentages

356

Chapter 19

n

Eruption of the Teeth: Local, Systemic, and Congenital Factors That Influence the Process

are supernumerary teeth. It is common for natal and neonatal teeth to occur in pairs. Natal and neonatal molars
are rare: Zhu and King found only 20 reported cases dating from 1897. They also reported that most premature
tooth eruption seems to occur in otherwise normal infants, with or without a family history of the condition.
In some infants, however, the presence of such teeth may
be a localized manifestation of various environmental
causes or an underlying syndrome, with the most common being Ellis-van Creveld syndrome, Hallermann-­
Streiff syndrome, Pierre Robin syndrome, and Sotos
syndrome. This underscores the importance of thorough
diagnostic evaluations of infants with natal or neonatal
teeth. It has been reported that less than 10% of neonatal
teeth are supernumerary.30
Spouge and Feasby believe that the terms natal teeth
and neonatal teeth constitute a relatively artificial distinction and should be further qualified to provide a more
practical clinical meaning.31 They have suggested that the
terms mature and immature are more in keeping with the
various prognoses associated with such teeth.
Most studies suggest that the etiology for the premature eruption or the appearance of natal and neonatal
teeth is multifactorial. A possible factor involving the
early eruption of primary teeth seems to be familial, due
to inheritance as an autosomal-dominant trait.
Many parents volunteer the information that their
teeth erupted early, and studies have found that from 10
to 15% of the children with natal or neonatal teeth had
parents, siblings, or other near relatives with a history of
such teeth.
A radiograph should be made to determine the amount
of root development and the relationship of a prematurely erupted tooth to its adjacent teeth. One of the parents
can hold the x-ray film in the infant’s mouth during the
exposure.
Most prematurely erupted teeth (immature type)
are hypermobile because of limited root development.
Some teeth may be mobile to the extent that there is
danger of displacement of the tooth and possible aspiration, in which case the removal of the tooth is
indicated. In some cases the sharp incisal edge of the
tooth may cause laceration of the lingual surface of the
tongue (Riga-Fede disease), and the tooth may have to
be removed.
Zhu and King were unable to find any reported cases
of aspirated natal or neonatal teeth. Extraction of such a
tooth, if necessary, is a simple procedure but is emotionally difficult for the parents.29 After the tooth is removed,
careful curettage of the socket is indicated in an attempt
to remove any odontogenic cellular remnants that may
otherwise be left in the extraction site. Such retained remnants may subsequently develop atypical toothlike structures that require additional treatment.
The preferable approach, however, is to leave the tooth
in place and to explain to the parents the desirability of
maintaining this tooth in the mouth because of its importance in the growth and uncomplicated eruption of the
adjacent teeth. Within a relatively short time the prematurely erupted tooth will become stabilized, and the other
teeth in the arch will erupt (Fig. 19-8).

A

B
Figure 19-8 A, Natal tooth in a 3-day-old infant. Because

the tooth was not excessively mobile, there was no reason
to recommend its removal. B, Within 2 months other teeth
in the mandibular anterior region erupted. The ungloved
fingers in the photographs are those of the infant’s parent.

Eruption of teeth during the neonatal period presents
less of a problem. These teeth can usually be maintained
even though root development is limited (Figs. 19-9 and
19-10).
A retained natal or neonatal tooth may cause difficulty for a mother who wishes to breast-feed her infant. If
breast-feeding is too painful for the mother initially, the
use of a breast pump and bottling of the milk are recommended. However, the infant may be conditioned not
to “bite” during suckling in a relatively short time if the
mother persists with breast-feeding. It seems that the infant senses the mother’s discomfort and learns to avoid
causing it.

EPSTEIN PEARLS, BOHN NODULES,
AND DENTAL LAMINA CYSTS
On rare occasions, small, white or grayish-white lesions
on the alveolar mucosa of the newborn may be incorrectly
diagnosed as natal teeth. The lesions are usually multiple

Chapter 19

n

Eruption of the Teeth: Local, Systemic, and Congenital Factors That Influence the Process

A

B
Figure 19-9 A, Parents of a 3-week-old infant were con-

cerned about the elevated mass of tissue on the mandibular
ridge. B, Radiograph revealed two primary central incisors
that would soon erupt. The ungloved fingers in the photograph are those of the infant’s parent.

but do not increase in size (Fig. 19-11). No treatment is indicated because the lesions are spontaneously shed a few
weeks after birth.
Fromm reported that clinically visible cysts were found
in 1028 of 1367 newborn infants.32 He noted and classified the following three types of inclusion cysts:  
1.	Epstein pearls are formed along the midpalatine
­raphe. They are considered remnants of epithelial
­tissue trapped along the raphe as the fetus grew.
2.	Bohn nodules are formed along the buccal and
lingual aspects of the dental ridges and on the palate
away from the raphe. The nodules are considered
remnants of salivary gland tissue and are histologically different from Epstein pearls.
3.	Dental lamina cysts are found on the crests of the maxillary and mandibular dental ridges. The cysts apparently originated from remnants of the dental lamina.
  
These findings are supported by the work of Neville
and associates.33

LOCAL AND SYSTEMIC FACTORS THAT
INFLUENCE ERUPTION
ANKYLOSED TEETH
The problem of ankylosed primary molars deserves much
attention by dentists. Application of the term submerged

357

molar to this condition is inaccurate, even though the
tooth may appear to be submerging into the mandible
or maxilla. This misconception results from the fact
that the ankylosed tooth is in a state of static retention, whereas in the adjacent areas eruption and alveolar
growth continue. The term infraocclusion, although commonly used today, is not preferable to ankylosis, in the
authors’ opinions.
Henderson noted that ankylosis should be considered
an interruption in the rhythm of eruption and that a
­patient who has one or two ankylosed teeth is more likely
to have other teeth become ankylosed.34
The mandibular primary molars are the teeth most often observed to be ankylosed (Figs. 19-12 and 19-13). In
unusual cases all the primary molars may become firmly
attached to the alveolar bone before their normal exfoliation time. Such a case is illustrated in this chapter (see
Fig. 19-17). Ankylosis of the anterior primary teeth does
not occur unless there has been a trauma.
The cause of ankylosis in the primary molar areas is
unknown, but at least three theories have been proposed.
The observation of ankylosis in several members of the
same family lends support to the theory that it follows a
familial pattern. Studies have reported that the condition
occurs more frequently among siblings of children with
the characteristics. The occurrence is noted to have a familial tendency and is probably a non-gender-linked trait.
Investigators have observed the prevalence of ankylosis to
be much lower among black children than among white
children.
Darling and Levers observed that, in a group of children with 108 ankylosed teeth, 21 of the affected primary teeth had no permanent successors.35 Others also
reported a higher prevalence of developmentally absent
premolar teeth in patients with ankylosis, suggesting that
there is a relationship between the congenital absence of
permanent teeth and ankylosed primary teeth. Steigman
and co-workers have discounted this relationship.36 Based
on observation and a careful review of the literature, they
reported that there appears to be no causal relationship
between ankylosed precursors and the congenital absence
of their successors.
Normal resorption of the primary molar begins on
the inner or lingual surfaces of the roots. The resorption process is not continuous but is interrupted by periods of inactivity or rest. A reparative process follows
periods of resorption. In the course of this reparative
phase, a solid union often develops between the bone
and the primary tooth. This intermittent resorption
and repair may explain the various degrees of firmness
of the primary teeth before their exfoliation. Extensive bony ankylosis of the primary tooth may prevent
normal exfoliation and the eruption of the permanent
successor.
Ankylosis of the primary molar to the alveolar bone
does not usually occur until after its root resorption begins. If ankylosis occurs early, eruption of the adjacent
teeth may progress enough that the ankylosed tooth is
far below the normal plane of occlusion and may even be
partially covered with soft tissue (Fig. 19-14). An epithelium-lined track, however, will extend from the oral cavity to

358

Chapter 19

n

Eruption of the Teeth: Local, Systemic, and Congenital Factors That Influence the Process

A

B

C
Figure 19-10 A, Eruption of one of the primary central incisors occurred at 4 weeks of age. The tooth was mobile because
of limited root formation, but it was not extracted. B, One of the prematurely erupted central incisors was subsequently lost
as the result of a fall, but the other was retained. C, Dilacerated root formation on one of the neonatal teeth. The ungloved
fingers in the photographs are those of the infant’s parent.

Figure 19-11 Dental lamina cyst (arrow). No treatment is indicated; such lesions disappear within a few weeks after birth.

the tooth. Ankylosis may occasionally occur even before
the eruption and complete root formation of the primary tooth (Fig. 19-15). Tsukamoto and Braham reported a
case of apparent early ankylosis of a mandibular second
primary molar that was not diagnosed until the patient
was 10 years of age, at which time the succedaneous
second premolar was lying malposed but occlusal to the
unerupted primary molar.37 Ankylosis can also occur late
in the resorption of the primary roots and even then can
interfere with the eruption of the underlying permanent
tooth (Fig. 19-16).
The diagnosis of an ankylosed tooth is not difficult
to make. Because eruption has not occurred and the
alveolar process has not developed in normal occlusion, the o
­ pposing molars in the area seem to be out
of occlusion. The ankylosed tooth is not mobile, even
in cases of advanced root resorption. Ankylosis can be
partially confirmed by tapping the suspected tooth and

Chapter 19

n

Eruption of the Teeth: Local, Systemic, and Congenital Factors That Influence the Process

359

Figure 19-14 Ankylosed second primary molar with a caries

lesion in the occlusal surface. This tooth probably became
ankylosed soon after root resorption began.
Figure 19-12 The second primary molar is ankylosed and

below the normal plane of occlusion. There is evidence of
root resorption and deposition of bone into the resorbed
areas.

1

2

A

3
4

B
Figure 19-13 A, Bilateral ankylosis of second primary molars. B, The ankylosed molars were eventually shed, and the second
premolars erupted into good occlusion. Frequently, the ankylosed teeth must be removed surgically.

360

Chapter 19

n

Eruption of the Teeth: Local, Systemic, and Congenital Factors That Influence the Process

A

Figure 19-15 An ankylosed, deeply embedded second pri-

mary molar. Surgical removal of this tooth is indicated.

an adjacent normal tooth with a blunt instrument and
comparing the sounds. The ankylosed tooth will have
a solid sound, whereas the normal tooth will have a
cushioned sound because it has an intact periodontal
membrane that absorbs some of the shock of the blow.
The radiograph is often a valuable diagnostic aid. A break
in the continuity of the periodontal membrane, indicating
an area of ankylosis, is often evident radiographically.
In the management of an ankylosed tooth, early
recognition and diagnosis are extremely important.
The ­
eventual treatment may involve surgical removal
(Fig. 19-17). H
­ owever, unless a caries problem is unusual
or loss of arch length is evident, the dentist may choose
to keep the tooth under observation. A tooth that is definitely ankylosed may at some future time undergo root
resorption and be normally exfoliated. When patient
cooperation is good and recall periods are regular, a
­
watchful waiting approach is best.
Belanger and colleagues reported a case in which early
ankylosis of even a mandibular second primary molar spontaneously resolved.38 The tooth was discovered to be unerupted in an otherwise complete primary dentition in occlusion at 3 years of age. The tooth remained in its ankylosed
condition until the adjacent first permanent molar began
erupting through the gingival tissue. By 6 years 9 months of
age, the primary molar had erupted into functional occlusion, and a normal-appearing periodontal ligament space
could be seen radiographically even though no space was
previously apparent in the furcation. Tieu and others present an excellent systematic review of the management of
ankylosed primary molars with premolar successors.39

ANKYLOSIS OF PRIMARY MOLARS WITH
ABSENCE OF PERMANENT SUCCESSORS
Kurol and Thilander emphasize the importance of the
presence of a permanent successor for normal exfoliation
of a primary molar. In their longitudinal study, no ankylosed primary molars without permanent successors were
found to exfoliate spontaneously. However, very slow root
resorption was observed for most of the ankylosed teeth.40
Messer and Cline observed that failure to carry out
timed extraction of severely infraoccluded molars results
in reduced alveolar bone support for the premolars.41
However, Kurol and Olson suggest that infraocclusions

B
Figure 19-16 A, A small spicule of root of the primary tooth
is ankylosed to the alveolar bone. This was overlooked at
the time of the routine examination. B, One year later, the
second primary molar is still retained, and the second premolar has moved into a more unfavorable position.

and ankylosis of primary molars do not constitute a general
risk for future alveolar bone loss mesial to the first permanent molars.42 In their study of 119 infraoccluded primary
molars next to permanent first molars, all but two of the
first permanent molars showed a normal alveolar bone
level mesially. Therefore the general treatment recommendation to await normal exfoliation and eruption of successors remains valid in their opinion. They suggest that, in
patients in whom there is an abnormality associated with a
succedaneous tooth (e.g., agenesis, ectopic eruption), early
intervention is most likely required. In situations in which
permanent successors of ankylosed primary molars are
missing, attempts have been made to establish functional
occlusion using stainless steel crowns, overlays, or bonded
composite resins on the affected primary molars. Currently, bonded restorations would be the preferred choice.
This treatment is successful only if maximum eruption of
permanent teeth in the arch has occurred. If the adjacent
teeth are still in a state of active eruption, they will soon
bypass the ankylosed tooth (Fig. 19-18).

ANKYLOSED PERMANENT TEETH
The incomplete eruption of a permanent molar may be
related to a small area of root ankylosis. The removal
of soft tissue and bone covering the occlusal aspect of
the crown should be attempted first, and the area should
be packed with surgical cement to provide a pathway
for the developing permanent tooth (Fig. 19-19). If the
permanent tooth is exposed in the oral cavity and at a
lower occlusal plane than the adjacent teeth, ankylosis is
the probable cause. Both Biederman and Skolnick have

Chapter 19

n

Eruption of the Teeth: Local, Systemic, and Congenital Factors That Influence the Process

361

A

B

C

D

Figure 19-17 A, All eight of the primary molars were ankylosed. Continuing eruption of the adjacent teeth has caused a loss
of arch length. B, Radiographs aided in the diagnosis of the ankylosed primary molars. The recommended treatment was
surgical removal of the ankylosed teeth. C, Space maintainers were constructed after removal of the ankylosed teeth and were
worn until the permanent teeth erupted. D, Ideal occlusion was achieved as a result of early diagnosis and the removal of the
ankylosed teeth at the proper time.

362

Chapter 19

n

Eruption of the Teeth: Local, Systemic, and Congenital Factors That Influence the Process

A

B

C
Figure 19-18 A, Ankylosed primary molar without a permanent successor. B, Mesiodistal width of the primary molar was
reduced to allow the premolar to erupt, and an overlay was constructed to establish occlusion with the opposing teeth.
C, Models at the left show the original condition. Center models show the occlusion at the time the overlay was placed on
the ankylosed tooth. Models at the right show the continued eruption of the adjacent teeth that occurred in the subsequent
18-month period.

described a luxation technique effective in breaking the
bony ankylosis.43,44 If the rocking technique is not immediately successful, it should be repeated in 6 months.
A delay in treatment may result in a permanently ankylosed molar (Fig. 19-20).
Unerupted permanent teeth may become ankylosed by
inostosis of enamel. According to Franklin, the process follows the irritation of the follicular or periodontal tissue resulting from chronic infection.45 The close association of
an infected apex with an unerupted tooth may give rise to
the process. In the unerupted tooth, enamel is protected
by enamel epithelium. The enamel epithelium may disintegrate as a result of infection (or trauma), the enamel may
subsequently be resorbed, and bone or coronal cementum
may be deposited in its place. The result is solid fixation of
the tooth in its unerupted position (Fig. 19-21).

TRISOMY 21 SYNDROME (DOWN SYNDROME)
Trisomy 21 syndrome (Down syndrome [DS])—that is, the
presence of three number 21 chromosomes rather than
the normal two (diploid)—is one of the congenital anomalies in which delayed eruption of the teeth frequently occurs. The first primary teeth may not appear until 2 years
of age, and the dentition may not be complete until 5
years of age. The eruption often follows an abnormal sequence, and some of the primary teeth may be retained
until 15 years of age. In a study of 127 males and 128
females with DS, Ondarza and colleagues found that, on
average, six primary teeth were delayed in eruption in

boys and 11 primary teeth were delayed in girls.46 A similar study conducted by Jara and colleagues in 116 males
and 124 females with DS showed delayed eruption of 13
permanent teeth in boys and eight permanent teeth in
girls.47 These studies seem to confirm that delayed tooth
eruption is common but sporadic in children with DS.
Earlier literature refers to DS as mongolism, but the use
of this term is inappropriate, and it may be insulting to
the affected families. DS occurs very early in embryonic development, possibly during the first cell divisions.
Anomalies of the eye and external ear are seen, and congenital heart defects are often present. The occurrence of
DS is frequently related to maternal age. Various sources
report the frequency of DS to be approximately 0.9 per
1000 births when the mother is less than 33 years of age,
2.8 per 1000 when the mother is 35 to 38 years old, and
38 per 1000 when the mother is 44 years or older, with
certain populations reporting a high of 91 per 1000 in
this older age group.
The diagnosis of DS in a child is not usually difficult
to make because of the characteristic facial pattern (Fig.
19-22). The orbits are small, the eyes slope upward, and
the bridge of the nose is more depressed than normal. In
a study of 194 children with DS, Cohen reported that 54%
demonstrated anomalies in the formation of the external
ear, characterized by outstanding “lap” ear with flat or
absent helix.48 Mental retardation is another characteristic finding, with most children in the mild to moderate
range of disability (see Table 16-2).

Chapter 19

n

Eruption of the Teeth: Local, Systemic, and Congenital Factors That Influence the Process

A

B

C

D

E

F

Figure 19-19 Series of radiographs demonstrating the successful

G

363

treatment of delayed eruption of a first permanent molar. A, The first
permanent molar has erupted on the right side. B, The left first permanent molar remains embedded in bone and is probably ankylosed.
C, Soft tissue and bone have been removed, and surgical cement has
been placed over the unerupted tooth. D, Within 3 months, the first
permanent molar has moved occlusally. E, The lingual arch and distal
extension hold the surgical cement in position and prevent continued
eruption of the opposing molar. F and G, The first permanent molar
has erupted, and the occlusion is good. Notice the progressive resorption of the distal root of the mandibular second primary molar.

364

Chapter 19

n

Eruption of the Teeth: Local, Systemic, and Congenital Factors That Influence the Process

Figure 19-20 Ankylosed first permanent molar.

Landau made a cephalometric comparison of children with DS and their normal siblings.49 Retardation in
the growth of the maxillae and mandible was evident in
those with DS. Both the maxillae and mandible were positioned anteriorly under the cranial base. The upper facial
height was found to be significantly smaller. The midface
was also found to be small in the vertical and horizontal
dimensions. The smaller jaws contribute to a tendency
for protrusion of the tongue and dental crowding, both
of which may compromise the development of good occlusion. The tongue also tends to be larger than normal.
Many children with DS have chronic inflammation
of the conjunctiva and a history of repeated respiratory
tract infections. The use of antibiotics has reduced the
incidence of chronic infection and has resulted in fewer
deaths from infection.

A

B

C

D

Figure 19-21 Ankylosis by inostosis. A, A mesiodens has delayed the eruption of the maxillary right permanent central incisor.

B, The primary incisors and the mesiodens were removed. During the surgical removal of the mesiodens, there was apparently
damage to the enamel epithelium. C, There is evidence of resorption of the enamel of the unerupted incisor and ankylosis of
the tooth. D, The left central incisor crown sustained a fracture and pulp exposure. A calcium hydroxide pulpotomy was successfully performed, which resulted in continued root development.

Chapter 19

n

Eruption of the Teeth: Local, Systemic, and Congenital Factors That Influence the Process

After a literature review, Cichon and colleagues concluded that individuals with DS have a higher prevalence
of periodontal disease than otherwise normal, age-matched
control groups and other patients with mental disabilities
and of similar age distribution.50 Furthermore, the reports of
exaggerated immunoinflammatory responses of the tissues
in patients with DS cannot be explained by poor oral hygiene alone and may be the result of impaired cell-mediated
and humoral immunities and deficient phagocytic systems.
Cichon and colleagues’ study of 10 patients with DS and
aged 20 to 31 years demonstrated that young age of onset,
severe destruction, and pathogenesis of disease in the periodontal tissues were consistent with a juvenile periodontitis
disease pattern.
Morinushi and associates obtained blood samples and
conducted gingival health assessments of 75 individuals
with DS and aged 2 to 18 years.51 The extent of gingival
inflammation and the antibody titers of the individuals
with DS suggested that colonization of certain pathogenic
organisms for periodontal disease had occurred before 5
years of age. The prevalence and extent of gingivitis were
significantly higher than in normal children. The antibody titers also suggested that colonization of additional
pathogenic organisms increased with age. The authors believe that there are abnormalities in the systemic defenses
that are responsible for the early onset of disease in the
individuals with DS. Similarly, Carlstedt and colleagues
have demonstrated significantly higher oral colonization
with Candida albicans in children with DS compared with
an age- and gender-matched control group.52 They believe
that abnormalities of the immune response in children

365

with DS are responsible for their greater susceptibility to
oral mucosal disease.
Dental caries susceptibility is usually low in those with
DS. This finding has been reported by Lee and associates,
who noted a much lower dental caries incidence in both
the primary and the permanent dentitions.53 Shapira and
Stabholz successfully demonstrated caries reduction and
improved periodontal health during a 30-month period
after initiating a comprehensive preventive oral health
program for 20 children with DS.54
Seagriff-Curtin and associates believe that although
some children with low cognitive ability are unmanageable
for dental procedures, most are pleasant, cheerful, affectionate, and well behaved.55 They can often be managed in
the dental office in a conventional manner. The possibility
of reduced resistance to infection should be considered in
the dental management of the child with DS.

CLEIDOCRANIAL DYSPLASIA
A rare congenital syndrome that has dental significance
is cleidocranial dysplasia (CCD), which has also been referred to as cleidocranial dysostosis, osteodentin dysplasia,
mutational dysostosis, and Marie-Sainton syndrome. Transmission of the condition is by either parent to a child
of either gender, so that the disorder thus follows a true
Mendelian dominant pattern. CCD can also occur sporadically with no apparent hereditary influence and with
no predilection for race. The diagnosis is based on the
finding of an absence of clavicles, although there may be
remnants of the clavicles, as evidenced by the presence
of the sternal and acromial ends. The fontanels are large,
and radiographs of the head show open sutures, even late
in the child’s life. The sinuses, particularly the frontal
­sinus, are usually small.
Richardson and Deussen performed cephalometric
analyses of 17 patients with CCD.56 They found that, on
average, the patients exhibited mandibular prognathism
caused by increased mandibular lengths and short cranial
bases. The maxillae tended to be short vertically but not
anteroposteriorly. Somewhat similar findings have been
reported by Jensen and Kreiborg in their study of 22 children with CCD.57
The development of the dentition is delayed. Complete
primary dentition at 15 years of age, resulting from delayed
resorption of the deciduous teeth and delayed eruption
of the permanent teeth, is not uncommon (Fig. 19-23).

A
Figure 19-22 Child with Down syndrome, at 1 and 5 years

of age.

Figure 19-23 Cleidocranial dysplasia. A, A Primary dentition

is still present at 15 years of age.

Continued

366

Chapter 19

n

Eruption of the Teeth: Local, Systemic, and Congenital Factors That Influence the Process

B

C
Figure 19-23 cont’d B, Delayed dentition and the presence of many supernumerary teeth. C, Removal of supernumerary teeth
in the maxillary arch caused irregular and delayed eruption of some of the permanent teeth.

Chapter 19

n

Eruption of the Teeth: Local, Systemic, and Congenital Factors That Influence the Process

One of the important distinguishing characteristics is
the presence of supernumerary teeth. Some children may
have only a few supernumerary teeth in the anterior region of the mouth; others may have a large number of
extra teeth throughout the mouth. Even with removal
of the primary and supernumerary teeth, eruption of the
permanent dentition, without orthodontic intervention,
is often delayed and irregular. Other reports by Jensen
and Kreiborg, based on their experiences and longitudinal study of 19 patients with CCD, provide information
to help clinicians predict the location and time of onset
of formation of supernumerary teeth. This information
should help the clinician develop an optimal surgical
treatment plan.58,59
Hutton and colleagues have reported the successful
dental management of a patient with CCD over a 15year period.60 The patient was first seen at 2 years of
age. Treatment consisted of timed extractions of primary and supernumerary teeth and conservative uncovering of the permanent teeth. The surgical procedures
were planned according to progressive radiographic
evidence of the development of the permanent teeth.
This management results in a nearly normal but slightly delayed eruption sequence. Orthodontic treatment
was begun at 14 years of age, and by 16 years of age
the patient displayed ­acceptable occlusion and normal
vertical dimension, root development, and periodontal
bone support.
Learning from their experiences with the long-term
management of 16 patients with CCD, Becker and colleagues advocate cooperative efforts by clinicians from
the disciplines of pediatric dentistry, oral and maxillofacial surgery, and orthodontics and dentofacial orthopedics.61 The pediatric dentist serves as the coordinator of
overall oral health care and disease prevention during an
extended treatment regimen that usually includes two
surgical interventions and three stages of orthodontic
surgery.
Delayed eruption has also been reported in other forms
of osteopetroses.

HYPOTHYROIDISM
Hypothyroidism is another possible cause of delayed
eruption. Patients in whom the function of the thyroid
gland is extremely deficient have characteristic dental
findings.

Congenital Hypothyroidism (Cretinism)
Hypothyroidism occurring at birth and during the period of most rapid growth, if undetected and untreated,
causes mental deficiency and dwarfism. In earlier medical and dental literature, this condition was referred to as
cretinism. Congenital hypothyroidism is the result of an
absence or underdevelopment of the thyroid gland and
insufficient levels of thyroid hormone (Fig. 19-24). Today
it is routinely diagnosed and corrected at birth because
of mandatory blood screening of newborn infants. An
­inadequately treated child with congenital hypothyroidism is a small and disproportionate person, with abnormally short arms and legs. The head is disproportionately

367

large, although the trunk shows less deviation from the
norm. Obesity is common.
Without adequate hormonal therapy, the dentition of
the child with congenital hypothyroidism is delayed in
all stages, including eruption of the primary teeth, exfoliation of the primary teeth, and eruption of the permanent teeth. The teeth are normal in size but are crowded
in jaws that are smaller than normal. The tongue is large
and may protrude from the mouth. The abnormal size
of the tongue and its position often cause an anterior
open bite and flaring of the anterior teeth. Tooth crowding, malocclusion, and mouth breathing cause a chronic
hyperplastic type of gingivitis.
Although untreated congenital hypothyroidism is
rare, even in developing countries, Loevy and colleagues
published a case report documenting the condition discovered in a 19-year-old boy.62 The patient presented
with a complete caries-free primary dentition and partially
erupted maxillary first permanent molars. All primary
teeth showed some abrasion. At a subsequent oral examination 1 year and 9 months after appropriate l-thyroxine
therapy was initiated, several primary teeth had exfoliated, permanent incisors and first molars had erupted,
and radiographs showed additional development of other
permanent teeth.

Juvenile Hypothyroidism (Acquired
Hypothyroidism)
Juvenile hypothyroidism results from a malfunction of the
thyroid gland, usually between 6 and 12 years of age. Because the deficiency occurs after the period of rapid growth,
the unusual facial and body patterns characteristic of a
person with congenital hypothyroidism are not present.
However, obesity is evident to a lesser degree. In untreated
juvenile hypothyroidism, delayed exfoliation of the primary teeth and delayed eruption of the permanent teeth are
characteristic. A child with a chronologic age of 14 years
may have a dentition in a stage of development comparable with that of a child 9 or 10 years of age (Fig. 19-25).

HYPOPITUITARISM
A pronounced deceleration of the growth of the bones
and soft tissues of the body will result from a deficiency
in secretion of the growth hormone. Pituitary dwarfism
is the result of an early hypofunction of the pituitary
gland. Again, early diagnosis is routine because of the
mandatory blood screening of newborn infants for congenital hypothyroidism.
An individual with pituitary dwarfism is well proportioned but resembles a child of considerably younger
chronologic age (Fig. 19-26). The dentition is essentially
normal in size.
Delayed eruption of the dentition is characteristic. In
severe cases the primary teeth do not undergo resorption
but instead may be retained throughout the life of the
person. The underlying permanent teeth continue to develop but do not erupt. Extraction of the deciduous teeth
is not indicated because eruption of the permanent teeth
cannot be ensured. Some degree of cognitive disability often
occurs.

368

Chapter 19

n

Eruption of the Teeth: Local, Systemic, and Congenital Factors That Influence the Process

A

B
Figure 19-24 A, Greatly delayed dentition of a 24-year-old patient with congenital hypothyroidism. B, With the administration
of thyroxine, the eruption of the permanent teeth was accelerated. (Courtesy Dr. David F. Mitchell.)

ACHONDROPLASTIC DWARFISM
Achondroplastic dwarfism, also diagnosed at birth, demonstrates a few characteristic dental findings. Growth of
the extremities is limited because of a lack of calcification
in the cartilage of the long bones. Stature improvements
have been reported with surgical lengthening of the limbs
and also with growth hormone therapy. The head is disproportionately large, although the trunk is normal in size.
The fingers may be of almost equal length, and the hands
are plump. The fontanels are open at birth. The upper face
is underdeveloped, and the bridge of the nose is depressed.
Although the etiology of achondroplastic dwarfism is
unknown, it is clearly an autosomal-dominant disorder,
although sporadic spontaneous mutations occur. There is
some evidence that the condition is more likely to occur

when the ages of the parents differ significantly. In contrast
to DS, the increased age of the father may be related to the
occurrence of the condition.
Deficient growth in the cranial base is evident in many
individuals with achondroplastic dwarfism. The maxilla
may be small, with resultant crowding of the teeth and
a tendency for open bite. Chronic gingivitis is usually
present. However, this condition may be related to the
malocclusion and crowding of the teeth. In the patient
shown in Figure 19-27, the development of the dentition
was slightly delayed.

OTHER CAUSES
Delayed eruption of the teeth has been linked to other disorders, including fibromatosis gingivae (see Chapter 14),

Chapter 19

n

Eruption of the Teeth: Local, Systemic, and Congenital Factors That Influence the Process

369

A

B

C
Figure 19-25 A, A 14-year-old girl with juvenile hypothyroidism. B, The occlusion was essentialy normal but was delayed in its

development. C, Delayed development of the teeth in juvenile hypothyroidism. The maxillary midline supernumerary tooth is
a coincidental finding.

370

Chapter 19

n

Eruption of the Teeth: Local, Systemic, and Congenital Factors That Influence the Process

A

B
Figure 19-26 A 28-year-old woman diagnosed as having hypopituitary dwarfism. A, Complete primary dentition at 28 years

of age. The first permanent molars have erupted. B, The roots of the primary teeth have not been resorbed to an appreciable
degree, although some permanent teeth show complete development.

Chapter 19

A

n

Eruption of the Teeth: Local, Systemic, and Congenital Factors That Influence the Process

371

B

C
Figure 19-27 A, A 14-year-old boy with achondroplastic dwarfism and his mother. Growth of the extremities is limited in
both. B, The upper face is greatly underdeveloped. C, The arch length is inadequate, and the teeth are crowded. (A and B,
courtesy Dr. Ralph E. McDonald. C, from Shafer W, Hine MK, Levy BM: A textbook of oral pathology, Philadelphia, 1958, WB
Saunders.)

372

Chapter 19

n

Eruption of the Teeth: Local, Systemic, and Congenital Factors That Influence the Process

Chronological delayed tooth eruption (>2SD)

Abnormal tooth development (defects in size,
shape, structure, color)

Normal tooth development

Normal biological
eruption: root length <
expected 2/3 length

• Pre-term birth/low birth
weight
• Nutrition
• Vitamin D-resistant rickets
• Downs syndrome
• Hypopituitarism

Radiographically evident

• Supernumerary
• Odontogenic/nonodontogenic tumor
• Cysts
• Ectopic eruption
• Eruption sequestrum

• Amelogenesis imperfecta
• Dentinogenesis imperfecta
• Regional odontodysplasia
• Dilacerations
• Dentin dysplasia

Delayed biological
eruption: root length >
expected 2/3 length

Physical obstruction

Not evident
radiographically
• Scar from trauma/
surgery
• Ankylosis
• Gingival
fibromatosis
(hyperplasia)
• Premature loss of
primary tooth

Other

• Nutritional deficiency
• Radiation damage
• Traumatic displacement of
the secondary germ
• Cleidocranial dysplasia
• Arch-length deficiency
• Sclerosteosis
• HIV infection
• Gardner syndrome
• Genetic predisposition

Figure 19-28 Diagnostic algorithm of delayed tooth eruption. (From Suri L, Gagari E, Vastardis H: Delayed tooth eruption:

pathogenesis, diagnosis, and treatment. A literature review, Am J Orthod Dentofacial Orthop 126:435, 2004.)
Albright hereditary osteodystrophy, chondroectodermal
dysplasia (Ellis-van Creveld syndrome), de Lange syndrome, frontometaphyseal dysplasia, Gardner syndrome,
Goltz syndrome, Hunter syndrome, incontinentia pigmenti
syndrome (Bloch-Sulzberger syndrome), Maroteaux-Lamy
mucopolysaccharidosis, Miller-Dieker syndrome, progeria
syndrome (Hutchinson-Gilford syndrome), and familial
hypophosphatemia.
Of additional interest is the effect of bisphosphonate therapy on children with osteogenesis imperfecta.
Bisphosphonates inhibit the ability of osteoclasts to resorb bone. Indeed, one study demonstrated that children

with osteogenesis imperfecta treated with bisphosphonates had an associated mean delay of 1.67 years in tooth
eruption.63 Finally, a well-laid-out diagnostic algorithm
for delayed tooth eruption is shown in Figure 19-28.

REFERENCES
1.	Logan WHG, Kronfeld R: Development of the human jaws
and the surrounding structures from birth to the age of 15
years, J Am Dent Assoc 20:379–427, 1933.
2.	Hernandez M, Espasa E, Boj JR: Eruption chronology of the
permanent dentition in Spanish children, J Clin Pediatr Dent
32:347–350, 2008.

Chapter 19

n

Eruption of the Teeth: Local, Systemic, and Congenital Factors That Influence the Process

3.	Hu X, et al.: Precise chronology of differentiation of developing human primary dentition, Histochem Cell Biol 141:
221–227, 2014.
4.	American Academy of Pediatric Dentistry Reference Manual
35:362, 2013/14.
5.	Parner E, et al.: A longitudinal study of time trends in the
eruption of permanent teeth in Danish children, Arch Oral
Biol 46:425–431, 2001.
6.	Cahill DR, Marks SC: Tooth eruption: evidence for the
central role of the dental follicle, J Oral Pathol 9:189–200,
1980.
7.	Marks SC, Cahill DR: Experimental study in the dog of the
non-active role of the tooth in the eruptive process, Arch Oral
Biol 29:311–322, 1984.
8.	Demirjian A, Levesque GY: Sexual differences in dental development and prediction of emergence, J Dent Res 59:1110–1122,
1980.
9.	Wise GE, et al.: Cellular, molecular, and genetic determinants of tooth eruption, Crit Rev Oral Biol Med 12(4):
323–335, 2002.
10.	Marks SC, Schroeder HE: Tooth eruption: theories and facts,
Anat Rec 245:373–374, 1996.
11.	Posen AL: The effect of premature loss of deciduous molars
on premolar eruption, Angle Orthod 35:249–252, 1965.
12.	Hartsfield J: Premature exfoliation of teeth in childhood and
adolescence, Adv Pediatr 41:453–470, 1994.
13.	Carlos JP, Gittelsohn AM: Longitudinal studies of the natural
history of caries. I. Eruption patterns of the permanent teeth,
J Dent Res 44:509–516, 1965.
14.	Moyers RE: Handbook of orthodontics, ed 4, Chicago, 1988,
Mosby.
15.	Suri L, et al.: Delayed tooth eruption: pathogenesis, diagnosis, and treatment. A literature review, Am J Orthod Dentofacial Orthop 126:432–445, 2004.
16.	Gellin ME: Indications and contraindications for the removal of primary teeth, Dent Clin North Am 13:899–911, 1969.
17.	Gellin ME, Haley JV: Managing cases of overretention of
mandibular primary incisors where their permanent successors erupt lingually, J Dent Child 49:118–122, 1982.
18.	Aminabadi NA, et al.: Lingual eruption of mandibular permanent incisors: a space correlated phenomenon, J Contemp
Dent Pract 10(1):25–32, 2009.
19.	Illingworth RS: Teething, Dev Med Child Neurol 11:376–377,
1969.
20	Tasanen A: General and local effects of the eruption of deciduous teeth, Ann Paediatr Fenn 14(Suppl 29):1–40, 1968.
21.	Jaber L, Cohen IJ, Mor A: Fever associated with teething, Arch
Dis Child 67:233–234, 1992.
22.	Macknin M, et al.: Symptoms associated with infant teething: a prospective study, Pediatrics 105(4):747–752, 2000.
23.	Swann IL: Teething complications: a persisting misconception, Postgrad Med J 55:24–25, 1979.
24.	Starkey PE, Shafer WG: Eruption sequestra in children, J Dent
Child 30:84–86, 1963.
25.	de Queiroz AM, et al.: Eruption sequestrum – case report and
histopathological findings, Braz Dent J 23(6):764–767, 2012.
26.	Maki K, et al.: Eruption sequestrum: x-ray microanalysis and
microscopic findings, J Clin Pediatr Dent 29(3):245–247, 2005.
27.	Leung AK: Natal teeth, Am J Dis Child 140:249–251, 1986.
28.	Kates GA, Needleman HL, Holmes LB: Natal and neo-natal
teeth: a clinical study, J Am Dent Assoc 109:441–443, 1984.
29.	Zhu J, King D: Natal and neonatal teeth, J Dent Child 62:
123–128, 1995.
30.	Adekoya-Sofowora CA: Natal and neonatal teeth: a review,
Niger Postgrad Med J 15(1):38–41, 2008.
31.	Spouge JD, Feasby WH: Erupted teeth in the newborn, Oral
Surg 22:198–208, 1966.

373

32.	Fromm A: Epstein’s pearls, Bohn’s nodules and inclusion
cysts of the oral cavity, J Dent Child 34:275–287, 1967.
33.	Neville BW, et al.: Oral and maxillofacial pathology, ed 3,
Philadelphia, 2009, Saunders.
34.	Henderson HZ: Ankylosis of primary molars: a clinical, radiographic, and histologic study, J Dent Child 46:117–122,
1979.
35.	Darling AI, Levers BG: Submerged human deciduous molars
and ankylosis, Arch Oral Biol 18:1021–1040, 1973.
36.	Steigman S, Koyoumdjisky-Kaye E, Matrai Y: Submerged deciduous molars and congenital absence of premolars, J Dent
Res 52:842, 1973.
37.	Tsukamoto S, Braham RL: Unerupted second primary molar
positioned inferior to the second premolar: clinical report,
J Dent Child 53:67–69, 1986.
38.	Tieu LD, et al.: Management of ankylosed primary molars
with premolar successors: a systematic review, J Am Dent Assoc 144(6):602–611, 2013.
39.	Belanger GK, Strange M, Sexton JR: Early ankylosis of a primary molar with self-correction: case report, Pediatr Dent
8:37–40, 1986.
40.	Kurol J, Thilander B: Infraocclusion of primary molars with
aplasia of the permanent successor: a longitudinal study,
Angle Orthod 54:283–294, 1984.
41.	Messer LB, Cline JT: Ankylosed primary molars: results and
treatment recommendations from an eight-year longitudinal
study, Pediatr Dent 2:37–47, 1980.
42.	Kurol J, Olson L: Ankylosis of primary molars—a future
periodontal threat to first permanent molars? Eur J Orthod
13(5):404–409, 1991.
43.	Biederman W: Etiology and treatment of tooth ankylosis, Am
J Orthod 48:670–684, 1962.
44.	Skolnick IM: Ankylosis of maxillary permanent first molar,
J Am Dent Assoc 100:558–560, 1980.
45.	Franklin CD: Ankylosis of an unerupted third molar by inostosis of enamel, Br Dent J 133:346–347, 1972.
46.	Ondarza A, et al.: Sequence of eruption of deciduous dentition in a Chilean sample with Down’s syndrome, Arch Oral
Biol 42:401–406, 1997.
47.	Jara L, et al.: The sequence of eruption of the permanent dentition in a Chilean sample with Down’s syndrome, Arch Oral
Biol 38:85–89, 1993.
48.	Cohen MM: Variability of facial and dental characteristics in
trisomy G, South Med J 64:51–55, 1971.
49.	Landau MJ: A cephalometric comparison of children with Down’s
syndrome and their normal siblings [thesis], Indianapolis, 1966,
Indiana University School of Dentistry.
50.	Cichon P, Crawford L, Grimm WD: Early-onset periodontitis associated with Down’s syndrome: clinical interventional
study, Ann Periodontol 3:370–380, 1998.
51.	Morinushi T, Lopatin DE, Van Poperin N: The relationship
between gingivitis and the serum antibodies to the microbiota associated with periodontal disease in children with
Down’s syndrome, J Periodontol 68:626–631, 1997.
52.	Carlstedt K, et al.: Oral carriage of Candida species in children and adolescents with Down’s syndrome, Int J Paediatr
Dent 6:95–100, 1996.
53.	Lee SR, et al.: Dental caries and salivary immunoglobulin A
in Down syndrome children, J Paediatr Child Health 40:530–
533, 2004.
54.	Shapira J, Stabholz A: A comprehensive 30-month preventive dental health program in a pre-adolescent population
with Down’s syndrome: a longitudinal study, Spec Care Dentist 16:33–37, 1996.
55	Seagriff-Curtin P, Pugliese S, Romer M: Dental considerations
for individuals with Down syndrome, N Y State Dent J 72:33–35,
2006.

374

Chapter 19

n

Eruption of the Teeth: Local, Systemic, and Congenital Factors That Influence the Process

56.	Richardson A, Deussen FF: Facial and dental anomalies in
cleidocranial dysplasia: a study of 17 cases, Int J Paediatr Dent
4:225–231, 1994.
57.	Jensen BL, Kreiborg S: Craniofacial growth in cleidocranial
dysplasia—a roentgencephalometric study, J Craniofac Genet
Dev Biol 15:35–42, 1995.
58.	Jensen BL, Kreiborg S: Development of the dentition in cleidocranial dysplasia, J Oral Pathol Med 19:89–93, 1990.
59.	Jensen BL, Kreiborg S: Dental treatment strategies in cleidocranial dysplasia, Br Dent J 172:243–247, 1992.
60.	Hutton CE, Bixler D, Garner LD: Cleidocranial dysplasia—
treatment of dental problems: report of a case, J Dent Child
48:456–462, 1981.

61.	Becker A, et al.: Cleidocranial dysplasia. Part II. Treatment
protocol for the orthodontic and surgical modality, Am J
Orthod Dentofacial Orthop 111:173–184, 1997.
62.	Loevy HT, Aduss H, Rosenthal IM: Tooth eruption and craniofacial development in congenital hypothyroidism: report
of case, J Am Dent Assoc 115:429–431, 1987.
63.	Kamoun-Goldrat A, Ginisty D, Le Merrer M: Effects of
bisphosphonates on tooth eruption in children with osteogenesis imperfecta, Eur J Oral Sci 116:195–198, 2008.

CHAPTER

20

Growth of the Face and
Dental Arches
s Donald J. Ferguson and Jeffrey A. Dean

For additional resources, please visit the

website.

CHAPTER OUTLINE
THE NATURE OF GROWTH
Basic Concepts of Human Growth
Craniofacial Growth Principles
Basic Concepts of Craniofacial
Growth
CRANIOFACIAL PATTERN
Ideal Paradigms for Dentofacial
Pattern
GROWTH AND FACIAL PATTERN
Consistency in Pattern Maturation
Ideal Frontal Facial Pattern
Ideal Facial Profile Pattern
Maintenance of Overall Pattern

H

Facial Growth Emulates General
Somatic Growth
GROWTH AND PATTERN
OF OCCLUSION
Consistency in Pattern Development
Primary Dentition Terminus
Opposing First Molars at Initial
Contact
Ideal Static Occlusion Pattern
Maintenance of Overall Pattern
GROWTH AND DENTAL ARCH
PATTERN
Similar Stage Sequencing

istorically, patient care in medicine and
­dentistry has been oriented toward the elimination of disease and the resolution of debilitating conditions. Competent care in dentistry today
includes issues related not only to disease and functional
disability but also to the patient’s well-being. The appearance of the face and dentition is recognized with increasing frequency as a major factor in human psychosocial
health.1
This chapter is about dental and facial malocclusion—
the recognition and anticipation of malocclusion during
the growing years. The dentofacial pattern can be easily
and accurately assessed at chairside. In clinical terms,
pertinent growth issues are discussed in relation to how
growth changes the pattern of the face, occlusion, and
dental arches. Knowledge of pattern appraisal and growth
can be integrated into efficacious clinical decisions about
a young patient. This chapter enhances the reader’s diagnostic and treatment planning skills with reference to
malocclusion in the pediatric patient.
The clinician treating malocclusion is primarily interested in the growth and development of craniofacial tissues as they result in facial and dentoalveolar patterns.
Attanasio and colleagues have demonstrated that our understanding of how genes express their influence on facial shape and dentofacial pattern, and how environment
influences gene expression, has advanced at a remarkable pace.2 How molecular mechanisms are implicated at
a clinically relevant level, however, has yet to be elucidated. Mao pointed out that what we understand about

Ideal Dental Arch Pattern
Tooth Size/Arch Size Ratio as Pattern
Determinant
Computation of Tooth Size/Arch
Size Balance
Compensations in Dental Arch
Development
Maintenance of Overall Pattern
Effects of Environmental Factors on
Dental Arch Pattern
SUMMARY

induced treatment effects at the macroscopic phenotype
level has been described in moderate detail at the cellular
level but is only beginning to be described at the level
of protein and peptide production.3 For this reason, this
chapter discusses dentofacial growth and development at
a macroscopic level, from the perspective of the practicing clinician.

THE NATURE OF GROWTH
Growth refers to an increase in anatomic size. Three parameters commonly used in growth literature to assess
craniofacial size increase are magnitude, velocity, and direction. Magnitude refers to the linear dimension overall
or the dimension of a part. Direction means the vector of
size increase as might be described on a three-dimensional coordinate system. Velocity is defined as the amount of
change per unit of time.
Size increase is typically illustrated in one of two
ways. When growth is measured periodically and measurements are plotted as percentages of total growth,
the result is a cumulative or distance curve (Fig. 20-1).
A human postnatal cumulative curve is characterized
by two plateaus and one period of accelerated growth.
A second method of graphically demonstrating growth
change is by use of an incremental or velocity growth
curve (Fig. 20-2). A velocity curve plots growth increments (e.g., centimeters per year) as a function of time.
Characteristic of an incremental human growth curve
is rapid accelerating prenatal growth, rapid decelerating
375

376

Chapter 20

n

Growth of the Face and Dental Arches

100

Percent growth completion

90
80
70
60
50
40

3

4

5

6
7
Age (years)

8

9

10

Figure 20-1 Cumulative (distance) growth curve.

BASIC CONCEPTS OF HUMAN GROWTH

6

Millimeters per year

5.5
5
4.5
4
3.5
3
2.5

or meaning. This chapter discusses growth with reference
to “ideal” facial, occlusion, and dental arch paradigms.
Growth is a complex phenomenon. There is a large
volume of information available on craniofacial growth.
Moreover, there is little consensus in the literature as to
which data or combination of data is most useful to the
practitioner committed to making competent decisions
about direct patient care. In light of these prevailing circumstances, the following concepts and principles about
craniofacial growth are presented in a way that should be
clinically useful and difficult to refute. These postulates
are derived and adapted in part from the widely held tenets about general human growth and development presented by Valadian and Porter.4 The discussion of general
craniofacial principles is followed by application of the
principles to three areas of craniofacial growth: the face,
occlusion, and dental arches. The goal of this chapter is to
integrate growth principles into patient appraisal to enhance diagnostic and treatment planning efficacy.

3

4

5

6
7
Age (years)

8

9

10

Figure 20-2 Incremental (velocity) growth curve.

postnatal growth for the first 2 or 3 years, and a period
of relatively slow incremental growth during childhood,
followed by growth acceleration for 2 or 3 years during
pubertal adolescence.
Three observations are central to a clinically relevant
understanding of growth. First, growth implies change,
a transition from one condition to another. This broader meaning of growth helps define growth as a concept.
Conceptual growth refers to a passage from one anatomic form (i.e., size and shape) to another. Transitions in
functional stage or activity refer to development. Development, in biologic literature, usually means increased
specialization or a higher order of organization and also
connotes an interaction of functioning parts. Development means increased organization or specialization of
functioning (physiologic) parts.
Growth is more readily understood when a physical
pattern is used to describe the effects of growth change.
Growth, by nature, is a relational concept. Without reference to a structural model, growth has little clinical utility

1.	Growth disposition is similar for all healthy individuals. Healthy individuals go through growth stages
that are the same for everyone, according to Valadian
and Porter.4 The prenatal period, from conception to
birth, averages 40 weeks in length. Infancy includes
the first 2 years of life after birth, and childhood
ranges from 2 to 10 years for girls and from 2 to 12
years for boys. The length of adolescence is the same
for both genders but is comprised of different years,
from 10 to 18 years for females and from 12 to 20
years for males (Fig. 20-3).
Each growth stage is unique. Rate of size increase
is most remarkable during the prenatal period and declines substantially during infancy. Generally, growth
velocity plateaus during childhood and increases again
during adolescence. All healthy individuals experience
these growth cycles, although the various basic tissues
and body parts are affected differently.
2.	Different body parts increase in length at different
rates. From birth to adulthood, the head increases
about twice in length, the trunk about three times, the
arms about four times, and the legs about five times.
Different parts of the body grow at different times and
at different rates. For example, the head increases in
size very early in life, and its rate of increase is very
rapid during the prenatal and early postnatal periods.
3.	The overall potential for growth is determined primarily by intrinsic or genetic factors. Genetic endowment is the main determinant of growth potential.
Intrinsic factors are also those conditions and events
that occur from conception to birth. Maternal nutrition or disease can modify child development before
birth. Some tissues tend to demonstrate high genetic
predilection. Neural and primary cartilage tissue
growth seems genetically predisposed in size and
growth timing. Tooth size appears to be under strict
genetic control.5,6
4.	The extent to which an individual attains his or her
potential for growth is determined predominantly by
extrinsic or environmental factors. Extrinsic factors

Chapter 20

n

377

Growth of the Face and Dental Arches

12

10
Females

Increments per year

Males
8

6

4

2

-1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20
Age (years)
Infancy

-2

Prenatal

0

Adolescence-female

Childhood–female

Adolescence-male

Childhood–male

Figure 20-3 Incremental growth curve illustrating growth stages.

CRANIOFACIAL GROWTH PRINCIPLES
1.	The basic tissue types and functioning spaces that
comprise the head and face are subject to growth
timing differences. The human head is composed of
a variety of basic tissue types; the relative percentages of these types, at any given age, depend on the
timing of their growth. Neural tissue completes its
growth at an early age. By contrast, general somatic
tissues, such as muscle, bone, and connective tissue,
mature at a slower rate. Neural tissue has attained
about 60% to 70% of adult size by birth, and its
growth is about 95% completed by middle childhood. This is in sharp contrast to growth of other
craniofacial soft tissues (Fig. 20-4). Muscle tissue is
only 40% to 45% of its adult size by birth, and its
growth is approximately 70% completed by 7 years
of age. The size of craniofacial lymphoid tissue
(tonsils and adenoids) is about 125% of adult size
at 5 years of age and decreases gradually to adulthood. Linder-Aronson and Leighton have shown that
functional pharyngeal space increases in relation to
decreased tonsillar-adenoid mass.7

140
120
Percent growth completion

include all postnatal environmental conditions, such
as nutrition, illness, exercise, and climate. Environmental factors of particular interest to the dental
clinician are oral habits, pathology, caries, premature
loss of teeth, and metabolic disease. In the absence of
detrimental extrinsic factors, the dentofacial complex
will tend to attain its maximum potential in growth.

100
80
60
Tonsils and
adenoids

40

Brain
Head muscles

20
0

0

2

4

6

8
10
Age (years)

12

14

16

18

Figure 20-4 Cumulative growth curve for craniofacial neu-

ral, muscle, and lymphoid tissues. (From Linder-Aronson S,
Leighton BC: A longitudinal study of the development of
the posterior nasopharyngeal wall between 3 and 6 years of
age, Eur J Orthod 5:47-58, 1983.)
The growth timing of skeletal tissues also demonstrates variation. Craniofacial bone growth is about
45% completed by birth and 70% completed by 7 years
of age. In contrast, primary cartilage of the head and
face has achieved approximately 75% of adult size by
birth and 95% by 7 years of age (Fig. 20-5). The small

378

Chapter 20

n

Growth of the Face and Dental Arches

Percent growth completion

100

80

60
Bone
Primary
cartilage

40

20

0

2

4

6

8

10 12 14
Age (years)

16

18

20

22

Figure 20-5 Cumulative growth curve for craniofacial bone

and primary cartilage.

amount of primary cartilage remaining in the head
and face after middle childhood, however, continues
to grow through puberty.
2.	Growth of primary cartilage and functioning spaces
has a directing influence on craniofacial pattern
change. Primary cartilage is a tissue of particular
interest to craniofacial growth theorists. According
to Enlow and Hans, it is singular in form; has the
capacity to grow from within (interstitial growth); is
pressure-tolerant, noncalcified, flexible, and nonvascular; and does not require a covering nutrient membrane for survival.8 Primary cartilage found in the
head and face is identical to the growth plate cartilage
of long bones. Scott contends that primary cartilage
is genetically predisposed, acts during growth as an
autonomous tissue, and is able to directly influence
the craniofacial pattern.9
Sperber documents that primary cartilage first appears in the head during the fifth prenatal week.10 By
the eighth prenatal week, a cartilaginous mass called
the chondrocranium is present and is the precursor to
the adult cranial base and nasal and otic structures. By
middle childhood, most primary cartilage is replaced
by bone in a process called endochondral bone formation.
The overall growth-directing influence of primary
cartilage on craniofacial pattern change is most profound in early life. By birth, cartilage constitutes a substantial portion of the nasal septum and cranial base.
Interstitial expansion of primary cartilage probably has
a direct influence on the position of the maxilla by way
of the septopremaxillary suspensory ligament, as suggested by Latham11 and later contended by Gange and
Johnston.12 The maxilla is most likely thrust downward and forward during infancy and early childhood.
The contributions to midface growth of primary cartilage are greatly diminished after middle childhood.
The development of functioning spaces has also received considerable attention as a key concept among
craniofacial growth theories.13 The head carries out numerous functions. Some functions are more e­ ssential

than others, but all require the development and maintenance of spaces. Neural integration is a critical function, and space is required for the brain and central
and peripheral nervous system expansion. Respiration
and deglutition are also essential to life and require development of nasal, pharyngeal, and oral spaces. Sight,
olfaction, hearing, and speech are important but less
critical craniofacial functions that also require development of functioning spaces for operation.
According to Moss and Salentijn, a likely craniofacial growth scenario of functioning space development
in head and facial patterns includes the following sequence of events.14 Rapid size increase of the brain
during prenatal and early postnatal life thrusts the calvarial bony plates outward and the midface forward.
Birth invokes a set of functional processes previously
not essential for life (i.e., breathing and swallowing).
Repositioning of the mandible and tongue takes place
to ensure patency of nasal-oral-pharyngeal spaces. The
mandible is depressed and thrust forward for these
functions to be supported and maintained.
3.	Mandibular condylar cartilage, craniofacial sutures,
and appositional-resorptive bone change facilitate
pattern growth of the head and face. Koski identifies
the mandibular condyles, once considered growth
centers with directive capacity, as an adaptive growth
mechanism.15 Cartilage found at the head of the
condyle is a secondary, fibrous cartilage and differs
significantly from the primary, growth plate cartilage
considered to be under high genetic control.16 During craniofacial growth, the mandible is repositioned
continuously to its best functional advantage. Reposturing alters the anatomic position of the condyle
relative to that of the glenoid fossa. Compensatory
growth of secondary condylar cartilage is one mechanism that facilitates the maintenance of mandibular
position.
Koski also points out that craniofacial sutures are
important growth sites that serve to facilitate calvarial
and midface growth.15 Calvarial sutures close by 5 years
of age, but some facial sutures remain patent through
puberty. Craniofacial bones are thrust apart by primary
cartilage, and functioning space increases. Sutures enable osseous deposition to occur at bone edges, which
allows bones of the face and skull to adapt.
Enlow and Hans have shown that bone, unlike primary cartilage, is subject to environmental controls.17
Bone may assume many forms during growth; it is
pressure-sensitive, calcified, vascular, and relatively inflexible, and requires a covering membrane for survival. The craniofacial skeleton increases in size by way of
surface addition only and increases in shape through
differential appositional-resorptive bone growth. This
differential growth process accounts for a considerable
amount of size increase after middle childhood.
Growth theorists Moss and Salentijn13 believe
that the general somatic tissues (i.e., bone, muscle,
and connective tissue) demonstrate growth change
as a consequence of supporting the functioning operations of the head. Indeed, the research evidence of
Linder-Aronson18 and of Harvold and associates19 is

Chapter 20

135

97th
90th
75th
50th
25th
10th
3rd

125

Millimeters

115
105
95
85
75

2

4

6

8

14
10
12
Age (years)

16

18

20

Figure 20-6 Cumulative growth chart for male face height

(hard tissue nasion to menton), illustrating seven percentile
levels. • Relatively normal growth; □ deviation of several
percentile levels during growth, suggestive of abnormalcy.
(From Broadbent BH et al: Bolton standards of dentofacial
developmental growth, St. Louis, 1975, Mosby.)
convincing in that bone and muscle, as basic tissues,
are adaptive and compensatory. Understanding bone
and muscle growth may come through understanding
the temporal development of functioning spaces and
the effects of interstitial cartilage expansion on surrounding tissues.
4.	Growth of the head and face tends to demonstrate relative equivalency. Humans tend to grow with relative
consistency. A percentile growth chart is a valuable instrument for assessing growth consistency over a time
period (Fig. 20-6). Percentile charts are customarily
divided into the following seven percentile levels: 97th,
90th, 75th, 50th, 25th, 10th, and 3rd. Healthy children
tend to maintain a similar percentile level through
successive stages of development. Deviations during
growth of more than two percentile levels may indicate
developmental problems, such as illness or disease.
Attributes (craniofacial parts) that are structurally related also maintain a consistent relationship
throughout successive stages of growth after infancy.
Enlow and Hans17 identify the dental arches of the
maxilla and mandible as an example of a structural
part-counterpart relationship. An Angle Class II skeletal pattern at 3 years of age is maintained into adulthood without corrective therapy. Both dental arches in
healthy individuals tend to increase in size at about the
same rate. Hence, balanced or equivalent growth tends
to maintain architecturally related structures of any
craniofacial pattern that is present after 2 years of age.

BASIC CONCEPTS OF CRANIOFACIAL GROWTH
1.	Different parts of the craniofacial complex grow at
different times. The head takes on appearance characteristics unique to each particular growth stage.
Different parts of the face experience differences in

n

Growth of the Face and Dental Arches

379

growth timing as well. The infant has a disproportionately large calvaria and forehead compared with the
adult because growth of the neural tissue takes place
earlier in life than does facial growth.
Size increase of the face and calvaria in the three
spatial planes is a differential growth process. Scott,20
Meredith,21 and Ranly22 have contributed to an understanding of this process. By birth, the cranial height
dimension has attained about 70% of its adult status;
cranial width, 65%; and cranial length or depth, 60%
(Fig. 20-7). In contrast, only 40% of facial height and
45% of facial length (depth) have been achieved by
birth. Face width (i.e., bizygomatic and bigonial), on
the other hand, has attained about 60% of adult stature. Growth in face width actually falls between the
classic neural and general somatic growth curves.
After birth, a pattern in facial growth timing
­emerges. The anterior cranial base completes most of
its growth during infancy and early childhood, but
frontal and nasal bones continue outward expansion through appositional-resorptive bone growth.23
Growth magnitude and duration are greater for the
anterior maxilla than for the forehead but less than for
the anterior mandible. The posterior face demonstrates
the greatest incremental growth during late puberty.
2.	Differences in growth size, direction, velocity, and
timing are observed among individuals. Bergersen has
also noted large variations in growth patterns among
individuals and has shown that any measured attribute
will demonstrate a range of expression about a central
tendency.24 Incremental growth curves for healthy
males and females will demonstrate the same general
disposition but may show marked differences in maturation timing (Fig. 20-8). Generally, females mature 2
years earlier than males, but Valadian and Porter have
indicated that variations are so great that an earlymaturing boy may mature earlier than a late-maturing
girl.4 Males tend to grow larger in size than females.
3.	The heads and faces of no two humans are exactly
the same. Brodie pointed out that no two humans
are exactly the same.25 This fact is no more clearly
evident than when one compares, at any given age,
a measured attribute shared by healthy individuals.
Most attributes have a range of expression that can be
graphically illustrated by a normal distribution curve
(Fig. 20-9).
If the same attribute was measured in a population of individuals, the most frequently occurring
value (mode), middle value in the series (median), or
arithmetic average of all the measured values combined (mean) would represent the central tendency
of the population. Central tendency is often referred
to as normalcy. Another way to describe attribute distribution is by using percentile equivalents. The 50th
percentile indicates the center of the distribution, the
25th percentile the lower one fourth, and so on.
A third statistical parameter often used in growth
literature to indicate distribution is the standard deviation. A standard deviation (SD) of ± 1 includes about
68% of the entire population; ± 2 SD and ± 3 SD are
equivalent to approximately 95% and 99% of the

380

Chapter 20

Growth of the Face and Dental Arches

n

50
Number of cases

Percent growth completion

100
90
80
70

0
Cranial width
Cranial height
Cranial depth
Facial width
Facial height
Facial depth

60
50

0

2

4

6

8
10
12
Age (years)

14

16

18

12
11

Increments per year

10
9
8
7
6
5
4
Early female
Early male
Late female

1
0

Late male

6

8

10

12

14
16
Age (years)

18

20

-2

-1

0

1

2

3

Standard
deviations

16th 50th 84th 98th 99.9th Percentile
equivalents

deviations and percentile equivalents.

in width, height, and depth. (From Scott JH: The growth of
the human face, Proc R Soc Med 47:5, 1954; Meredith HV:
Changes in form of the head and face during childhood,
Growth 24:215-264, 1960; Ranly DM: A synopsis of craniofacial growth, New York, 1980, Appleton & Lange.)

2

-3

Figure 20-9 Normal distribution curve illustrating standard

Figure 20-7 Cumulative growth curve for calvaria and face

3

-4

0.1st 2nd

40
30

25

22

Figure 20-8 Incremental growth curves for early- and late-

maturing males and females.

distribution, respectively. The mean values and SDs for
a normative population are invaluable aids in describing a patient’s condition. By comparing a patient’s
value to a population value for the same trait, the clinician can make statements about relative largeness or
smallness. Generally, measurements beyond ± 2 SD are
considered clinically important because those values
fall outside 95% of the population on which the normative value is based.
In the remainder of this chapter, references are
made to craniofacial growth principles and concepts
in discussing growth of the face, occlusion, and dental
arches.

CRANIOFACIAL PATTERN
In clinical assessment and treatment planning for the
young patient, information about growth is often not
considered to the degree that it should be. Craniofacial
growth issues can be made more central to patient care
concerns when a physical model is used to help visualize
growth effects. For this reason, a particularly strong effort
is made here to define physical craniofacial pattern.
There are two methods commonly used in dentistry
to gather information about craniofacial pattern. One
method is to examine the patient physically at chairside.
Information collected in this fashion is based on criteria
contrived and established in the practitioner’s mind. The
second method is to analyze dental records. Historically,
cephalometric analysis has been a particularly useful tool
for collecting objective information about craniofacial
patterns. Generally, the patient’s radiographic values
measured on the cephalogram are compared with normative values derived from a population database. In this
way, degrees of normalcy can be estimated by the clinician. One database is unique in its composition in that
only individuals presenting with optimal or ideal craniofacial pattern were included in the study.26 This unique
conceptual approach to defining craniofacial pattern enables the practitioner to make assessments about patient
optimality. Patient-measured values are compared with
values from cephalograms that have relatively ideal patterns. Cephalometric analysis is discussed in Chapter 21.
Darwis and colleagues suggest that using a combination of
methods, such as three-dimensional facial morphometry
and Fourier analysis, can provide a more comprehensive
knowledge of growth and development of craniofacial
structures and thus may allow for the improved prediction
of clinical outcomes.27 Fourier analysis is a mathematical
curve-fitting procedure that can represent boundaries so
that the outlines of objects can be addressed.

IDEAL PARADIGMS FOR DENTOFACIAL PATTERN
Standards for chairside facial appraisal have been offered by
Ackerman and Proffit,28 Angle,29 Bell and colleagues,30 Cox
and van der Linden,31 Lucker and co-workers,1 and Patterson and Powell.32 Most of these physical appraisal models
refer to the adult face. Horowitz and Hixon33 describe idealized facial pattern as “the way things ought to be.” Models available for examining the face espouse an a
­ ssessment

Chapter 20

of proportion, balance, and harmony—concepts that help
define overall facial attractiveness. The concept of an ideal
face can be a useful clinical tool if it is used properly and
its limitations are acknowledged. The first limitation is the
fact that an ideal has little or no biological basis. Biological data can neither refute nor support the contention that
the face should be ideal. Second, faces do not need to be
ideal to work properly; ideal pattern, for the most part, has
little connection with physiologic function. Third, an ideal
model is simply a mental construct, a fiction. The words
ideal paradigm mean “perfect example.”
A perfect example, on the other hand, can be a powerful diagnostic and treatment-planning tool. The patient’s facial pattern can be compared with criteria for
idealness, the differences noted, and hence a problem
list constructed. Criteria for an ideal face can help organize a vast array of information that is readily available to the clinician through physical observation. An
ideal facial paradigm can serve as a treatment planning
tool as well. Although the concept of an ideal face is
fictitious and biologically unsupported, it can serve as
a guide by providing an example toward which treatment may be directed. Ideal paradigms for dental occlusion and dental arch pattern are also represented in the
dental literature; good examples may be found in the
works of Angle,29 Andrews,34 and Roth.35 The purposes
served by these paradigms are the same as for ideal facial models; they are powerful diagnostic and treatmentplanning aids.

n

Growth of the Face and Dental Arches

381

Figure 20-10 Graphic illustration of facial profile flattening

from 6 years of age (solid line) to 18 years of age (broken line).

GROWTH AND FACIAL PATTERN
CONSISTENCY IN PATTERN MATURATION
Following birth, the face increases in size to a greater extent than does the calvaria. Bell and associates propose
that, by adulthood, the ideal face should be equally proportioned in forehead, midface, and lower face heights.30
Enlow demonstrated that the facial profile flattens as the
face ages. Nose and chin become more prominent, and
lips become less pronounced36 (Fig. 20-10). Every healthy
individual, regardless of the overall craniofacial pattern,
experiences profile flattening and face height increases
relative to the cranium.

IDEAL FRONTAL FACIAL PATTERN
Criteria for facial idealness are age-dependent. Because
the face elongates and the profile becomes less convex
with maturity, ideal criteria appropriate for the adult face
would not necessarily apply to the younger face. The ideal
frontal facial pattern for a 7-year-old child might include
the
following criteria (Fig. 20-11):
  
1.	Right and left face halves are symmetrical.
2.	Glabella (midpoint between eyebrows) to subnasale
(point where columella merges with upper lip) equals
subnasale to menton (inferior aspect of chin).
3.	Subnasale to lower border of upper lip represents onethird the distance from subnasale to menton.
4.	The upper central incisor edge is 2 mm inferior to the
lower border of the upper lip.
5.	Alar base width equals inner canthal width.

Figure 20-11 Ideal frontal facial pattern for a 7-year-old child.

IDEAL FACIAL PROFILE PATTERN
Use of a reference plane is very helpful for evaluation
of the facial profile at chairside. The Frankfort horizontal plane is an anthropometric reference line frequently

382

Chapter 20

n

Growth of the Face and Dental Arches

used for analysis of the lateral face. It is defined by Farkas as the superior limit of the external auditory meatus
and the palpated border of the infraorbital bony rim.37
A second reference line constructed perpendicular to the
Frankfort horizontal plane and through the glabella (FHP)
has been used in lateral profile assessment by Legan and
Burstone.38
The ideal profile pattern for a 7-year-old child might
include the following criteria (Fig. 20-12):
  
1.	Chin 5 mm behind FHP
2.	Most anterior aspect of lower lip on FHP
3.	Most anterior aspect of upper lip 5 mm ahead of FHP
4.	Nasolabial angle of 100 degrees
5.	No more than 2 mm lip separation when relaxed

MAINTENANCE OF OVERALL PATTERN
The overall pattern presented by the individual at an
early age will be maintained into adulthood. Although
every individual experiences profile flattening and facial
elongation as the face matures, Enlow and colleagues
demonstrated that the magnitude of these changes is
not great enough to offset disharmonies in overall facial structure.39 Martinez-Maza and associates examined
facial bone modeling behaviors and confirmed that the
skeletal components of the craniofacial complex maintain functional and structural balance integrity while
increasing in size during growth.40 Discrepancies between the positions of the maxilla and mandible persist
throughout life unless clinical therapy is used to rectify
the disharmonies.
At chairside, disharmony between the maxilla and
the mandible can be simply and readily identified. A
list of differences can be formulated by comparison of
the patient’s facial measurements with the criteria of
an ideal face. The differences serve as a patient problem
list. Adding average growth change (i.e., magnitude, direction, and velocity) to the pattern presented by the
individual will give an estimate of how facial patterns
will look at a later age. This growth scheme is known
as a mean-change-expansion scheme.33 Balbach demonstrated it to be the most useful way to predict the effects of growth on facial pattern.41 The mean-changeexpansion scheme is useful for evaluation of almost all
patients routinely seen in the dental office. Balanced or
average growth affecting all aspects of the head and face
relatively equally, however, cannot be assumed for all
patients. The heads and faces of individuals who have
some craniofacial congenital anomalies, hypoplastic
defects, or acquired deformities that alter primary or
compensatory craniofacial growth mechanisms do not
grow in a typical manner.
Because growth change in healthy children affects
the face in a relatively consistent and predictable way,
the key to facial diagnosis and treatment planning is the
clinician’s ability to identify and diagnostically describe
facial pattern. Identification of balanced, proportional
facial pattern, as well as recognition of facial imbalance,
should be routine during patient assessment. The use of
criteria related to ideal facial pattern can be helpful.
The goal in treating facial imbalance in children is
to establish architectural balance in the facial pattern.

If corrective measures include compensation for the effects from treatment rebound or relapse, the facial pattern established by therapy will be maintained. As the
face continues to grow and increase in size, all structurally related parts of the treated face will undergo relative
growth equality.
Correction of facial imbalance in the child is achieved
through clinical manipulation of the means by which
adaptive, compensatory facial growth occurs. Some sutures of the upper face remain patent into adolescence.
Application of forces through orthopedic headgear, controlled in direction and amount, can result in an alteration of maxillary growth direction and, ultimately, of
maxillary position. Also, maxillary transverse size can be
increased by judicious expansion of the palatal suture.
The secondary cartilage of the mandibular condyle remains responsive to mechanical stimulation throughout
life, but appositional response of this fibrocartilage decreases with age, as shown by McNamara and Carlson.42
Facial bones respond to changes in microenvironmental
stress and strain by changing form. Patterns of osseous
deposition and resorption can be altered by the use of
appliances that carefully load bone with physiologically
compatible biomechanical forces.
Successful treatment of a child with facial imbalance
secondary to mandibular retrognathia, for example, involves manipulation of several growth mechanisms.
Mandibular anterior repositioning with a functional appliance probably affects many sites. Graber and Swain43
believe that modification of the dentofacial complex occurs
  by the following means:
1.	Condylar growth (secondary cartilage growth)
2.	Glenoid fossa adaptation (apposition-resorption bone
growth)
3.	Elimination of functional retrusion
4.	More favorable mandibular growth direction
5.	Withholding of downward and forward maxillary
arch movement (apposition-resorption bone growth)
6.	Differential upward and forward eruption of the lower
buccal segment (apposition-resorption bone growth)
7.	Orthopedic movement of the maxilla and upper dentition (maxillary suture system growth)

FACIAL GROWTH EMULATES GENERAL SOMATIC
GROWTH
The degree to which the facial pattern can be altered
through biomechanical therapy depends on the amount
of growth potential remaining. In general, the magnitude
of facial pattern alteration possible is inversely proportional to age: the older the individual, the less the facial
pattern can be therapeutically modified. The opportunity to alter compensatory, adaptive growth mechanisms
is also greater in a rapidly growing individual. Mellion
and colleagues report that the adolescent growth spurt
is characterized by increased growth velocity onset and
peak at about 9.6 and 11.5 years of age for girls and 12
and 14.3 years of age for boys.44 The maximum velocity
or peak height velocity of growth is attained approximately 2 years after pubertal onset. Cumulative facial
growth closely parallels general somatic growth (Fig.
20-13). Analysis of skeletal hand development can be

Chapter 20

n

Growth of the Face and Dental Arches

383

GROWTH AND PATTERN OF OCCLUSION
CONSISTENCY IN PATTERN DEVELOPMENT
Usually, no teeth are clinically visible at birth. Leighton
has shown that the upper anterior gum pad (intercuspid
width) is typically wider than the lower anterior pad, and
the upper anterior gum pad protrudes (overjet) about
5 mm relative to the lower anterior gum pad.45 The upper anterior gum pad usually overlaps (overbite) the lower
anterior pad by about 0.5 mm. In the first 6 months of
postnatal life, there is marked palatal width increase, and
the overjet decreases rapidly.

PRIMARY DENTITION TERMINUS
By 3 years of age, the occlusion of 20 primary teeth is
usually established. The relationship of the distal terminal planes of opposing second primary molar teeth can
be classified into one of three categories (Fig. 20-14). A
flush terminal plane (flush terminus) means that the anterior-posterior positions of the distal surfaces of opposing
­primary second molars are in the same vertical plane. A
mesial-step terminus is defined as a lower second primary
molar terminal plane that is mesial to the maxillary primary terminus. The distal-step terminal plane is a situation in
which the mandibular second primary molar terminus is
distal to the upper second primary molar terminus.
Statistical studies of primary terminal plane status report that 49% of the time, the terminal plane of the lower
primary second molar is mesial to the upper terminus
(mesial step); the lower terminus is flush with the upper
terminus 37% of the time; and the distal-step primary terminus is seen in approximately 14% of cases. These data
are derived from studies reported by Arya and associates46
and by Carlsen and Meredith.47

Figure 20-12 Ideal profile facial pattern for a 7-year-old

child.

110

Percent growth completion

100

OPPOSING FIRST MOLARS AT INITIAL CONTACT

90
80
70
60
Neural

50

Facial
Somatic

40
30

0

2

4

6

8

10 12 14
Age (years)

16

18

20

22

Figure 20-13 Cumulative growth curves for neural, facial,

and general somatic tissues.

helpful in estimating general skeletal maturation and,
hence, facial skeletal maturation. It is relevant to evaluate a child’s maturity in direct relation to the child’s
own pubertal growth spurt to assess whether maximum
pubertal growth is imminent, has been reached, or has
been passed.

The permanent first molars are clinically visible at about 6
years of age and are the first permanent teeth to emerge.
The relationship of permanent first molars when initial
occluding contact occurs during eruption may be represented by one of four categories (see Fig. 20-14). A Class
I relationship means that the mesial-buccal (m-b) cusp of
the upper permanent molar is in contact at or very near
the buccal groove of the lower permanent first molar.
This occurs approximately 55% of the time. An end-on
relationship means that m-b cusps of both molars oppose
one another. The incidence of this situation is about 25%.
A Class II relationship, occurring 19% of the time, is one
in which an upper m-b cusp is anterior to the lower m-b
cusp. Class III represents the situation in which an upper
m-b cusp is distal to the lower buccal groove. This occurs
in only 1% of the population.47 Table 20-1 shows the incidence of medial-step, flush, and distal-step primary terminus and end-on, Class I, Class II, and Class III permanent
first molar occlusions during the three stages of occlusion
development.46-48

IDEAL STATIC OCCLUSION PATTERN
The concept of ideal occlusion development has been described by Friel49 and by Lewis and Lehman.50 Sanin and

384

Chapter 20

n

Growth of the Face and Dental Arches

Savara have also shown that, to a considerable extent, ideal occlusion at a young age predisposes to an ideal adult
occlusion.51 The most desirable occlusion in the permanent dentition is a Class I interdigitation, and certain features in the primary and mixed dentitions, if observed
accurately, can provide clinical clues as to whether a Class
I relationship of the dentition will eventually develop.

INITIAL
CONTACT

DISTALSTEP

always

FINAL
OCCLUSION

always

The major difference between ideal adult and child
­ cclusions is the teeth present. By 7 years of age, the prio
mary central and lateral incisors have been or are in the
process of being replaced by their permanent successors,
and the permanent first molars have already erupted. The
primary dentition remaining usually includes the canine
and first and second molars of both arches. Criteria for
ideal dental occlusion for a 7-year-old child might include
the
following:
  
1.	Class I molar and canine interdigitation
2.	2-mm anterior and posterior overjet
3.	2-mm anterior overbite
4.	Coincident dental midlines

MAINTENANCE OF OVERALL PATTERN

FLUSH

MESIALSTEP
always

Figure 20-14 Graphic illustration of permanent first molar

occlusion development. Outlined crown images represent
three terminal plane relationships of primary second molars
at about 5 years of age. Darkened images represent various
permanent first molar relationships at initial occluding contact
(about 6½ years of age) and at full occlusion contact (about
12 years of age). (From Arya BS et al: Prediction of first molar
occlusion, Am J Orthod 63:610-621, 1973; Carlsen DB, Meredith HV: Biologic variation in selected relationships of opposing posterior teeth, Angle Orthod 30:162-173, 1960; Moyers
RA: Handbook of orthodontics, ed 3, Chicago, 1973, Mosby.)

Gum pad relationships at birth cannot be used as reliable
diagnostic criteria for predicting subsequent arch relationship. The primacy of life-supporting functions (i.e.,
respiration and swallowing) is so great at birth that major
unpredictable adjustments in maxillary and mandibular
positions take place in the first few years of life. By 3 years
of age, however, the relationship of maxilla to mandible
is well established, and the overall maxillomandibular
pattern does not change significantly thereafter.
One key diagnostic feature regarding future occlusion
status is the relationships of the primary terminal planes.
The likelihood of a Class I relationship developing in the
permanent dentition is greatest when a mild mesial-step
terminus exists during the primary dentition stage (see
Fig. 20-14). If an exaggerated mesial step exists, a Class III
permanent molar relationship will develop. The possibility that a Class I relationship will develop from a distalstep primary terminus is virtually nonexistent. Hence, the
presence of a distal step is highly predictive of a developing Class II permanent molar relationship.
Another important diagnostic feature that is predictive
of later occlusion status is the relationships of the first
permanent molars during initial occluding contact. The
first permanent molars erupt between 5 and 7 years of
age. The chance that a Class I interdigitation of the dentition will evolve is best when a Class I relationship is represented at initial permanent first molar occluding contact.
A Class II first permanent molar occlusion at initial occluding contact will predictably remain a Class II occlusion into the complete adult dentition. Also indicative of

Table 20-1
Incidence of Terminal Molar Relationships at Three Stages of Occlusion Development
Primary Terminal Plane at Age 5 Years

Initial Permanent First Molar Occlusion
at Age 6½ Years

49% Class I (ms)
37% Flush
14% Class II (ds)

1% Class III
27% Class I
49% End-on
23% Class II

Final Occlusion at About Age 12 Years

3% Class III
59% Class I
39% Class II

ms, medial step; ds, distal step.
Arya BS et al: Prediction of first molar occlusion, Am J Orthod 63:610-621, 1973.
Carlsen DB, Meredith HV: Biologic variation in selected relationships of opposing posterior teeth, Angle Orthod 30:162-173, 1960.
HEW reports on occlusion: summary and discussion, J Clin Orthod 12:849-862, 1978.

Chapter 20

n

Growth of the Face and Dental Arches

385

a developing malocclusion are some initially occluding
end-to-end relationships. Three quarters of initially contacting end-on first molar occlusions will shift toward a
Class I during the transition dentition phase. However,
25% of these end-on relationships will shift into a Class
II relationship. A Class III occlusion at initial contact will
predictably lead to a future Class III molar relationship.
This discussion regarding diagnostic and predictive information is based on the work of Arya and associates,46
Carlsen and Meredith,47 and Moyers.52
The development of the transitional-phase occlusion
and malocclusion is graphically illustrated in Figure 2014. Note that distal-step terminus always leads to Class II
initial contact and final permanent first molar occlusions.
The probability that a Class III final first permanent molar
relationship will develop from a Class III initial contact
occlusion is also very high. Development of the occlusion
from flush terminus, end-on, and Class I initial contact
molar relationships is highly variable.
The occlusion relationship of upper to lower dentition remains nearly the same throughout the growing
period.53 Exceptions are cases in which environmental
factors, such as premature loss of primary teeth, are superimposed on the developing occlusion, as shown by
Northway and associates.54 Carlsen and Meredith demonstrated that, 70% of the time, the lower permanent first
molars move mesially relative to the upper permanent
first molars during the transition occlusion phase.47 The
magnitude of this shift, however, typically does not compensate for a permanent first molar malocclusion. Overall
occlusion pattern is maintained during growth.

by the number 6), central incisor (1), lateral incisor (2),
canine (3), first premolar (4), second premolar (5), and
second molar (7), followed by the third molar (8). For the
maxillary arch, the usual sequence of eruption for the permanent teeth is as follows: 6-1-2-4-5-3-7-8. Eruption timing in girls generally precedes that in boys by an average
of 5 months.
Eruption times for permanent teeth can vary considerably depending on the specific tooth. According to Garn,
eruption time for the lower incisor varies the least; 90% of
lower permanent incisors erupt within a span of 3 years. In
contrast, eruption time varies the most for the l­ower second permanent premolar, which shows a 6½-year span.5
Dimensional changes for dental arch length, circumference, and intermolar and intercanine widths during
childhood and adolescence have been compiled by Moorrees.56,57 Average dimensional dental arch changes from
ages 6 to 18 years for maxillary and mandibular arches
are as follows:

GROWTH AND DENTAL ARCH PATTERN

Arch circumference:

SIMILAR STAGE SEQUENCING

IDEAL DENTAL ARCH PATTERN

The stage sequence of dental arch development is the same
for everyone. According to Nery and Oka, the crowns of
primary teeth begin calcification between 3 and 4 months
prenatally.55 The calcification of mandibular teeth usually precedes that of the maxillary dentition; the central
incisors typically show first evidence of calcification and
the second molars last. Boys typically begin calcification
before girls.
The first primary tooth to erupt is the central incisor
at about 7½ months, and the last to erupt is the second
primary molar at about 2½ years. Closure of the root
apex occurs at 3 years for the second primary molar.
The usual sequence of primary dentition eruption is the
central incisor (in Palmer notation, designated by the
letter A), the lateral incisor (B), the first primary molar
(C), and the canine (D), followed by the second primary
molar (E). Hence, the typical eruption sequence is A-BD-C-E.
Calcification of the permanent teeth does not begin
until after birth.55 The first permanent molar is the first to
show evidence of calcification, which takes place during
the second postnatal month. The third molar is the last to
begin calcification, which occurs at about 9 years.
The typical eruption sequence for the mandibular arch
is as follows: first molar (in Palmer notation, designated

Development of dental arch malocclusion is predictable.
Likewise, development of a clinically acceptable dental arch
can be predicted. The status of the dental arch at mid-adolescence is contingent on clinical features that can be easily
recognized during the transition phase dentition. The simplest method of evaluating the dental arch for factors predisposing to malocclusion is to compare the patient’s mixed
dentition dental arch with an ideal dental arch pattern.
For the dental arch, the ideal pattern for a 7-year-old
child might meet the following criteria:

  

Lower Arch
Arch width:
Arch length:
Arch circumference:

Bicanine: 3-mm increase
Bimolar: 2-mm increase
1-mm decrease because of the
­uprighting of incisors
Decrease of 4 mm

Upper Arch
Arch width:
Arch length:

Bicanine: 5-mm increase
Bimolar: 4-mm increase
Slight decrease because of the
­uprighting of incisors
Increase of 1 mm

  

1.	Tight proximal contacts
2.	No rotations
3.	Specific buccal-lingual axial inclinations
4.	Specific mesial-distal axial inclinations
5.	Even marginal ridges vertically
6.	Flat occlusal plane
7.	Excess (positive) leeway space

  

Ethnic background can make a difference in the dentition and occlusal development. An interesting study by
Anderson58 showed that the primary dental arch dimensions of African-American children were significantly
larger than those of European-American children in arch
width, length, perimeter, and interdental space.

386

Chapter 20

n

Growth of the Face and Dental Arches

TOOTH SIZE/ARCH SIZE RATIO AS PATTERN
DETERMINANT
Tooth size and alveolar size are the primary factors that
determine the status of the permanent dental arch. If
tooth size and arch size are not balanced, the effect on the
permanent dental arch is crowding or spacing. Crowding
is the most common feature of dental arch malocclusion.
Only when the combined size of the permanent teeth is
balanced with the size of the alveolar apical area is an
ideal dental arch possible.
Van der Linden referred to the alveolar bone surrounding the dental apex regions as the apical area.59 Ten Cate
reported evidence that the alveolus probably forms as a
result of inductive action from cells of the dental follicle.60 The size of alveolar bone is influenced by the many
environmental factors that affect intramembranous bone
growth. It is possible to clinically increase or decrease the
size of the alveolar apical area during growth. Fränkel has
demonstrated that alveolar arch size can be increased
dramatically during childhood and that the increases are
stable into adulthood.61
Tooth size, for the purpose of discussing dental arch
development, refers to the mesial-distal dimensions
of each tooth. According to Garn5 and Potter and colleagues,6 mesial-distal tooth size is determined primarily
by genetic factors. Four chromosomal gene loci appear to
be responsible for mesial-distal maxillary tooth size, and
the mandibular dentition seems to be under the genetic
control of six loci. Tooth size is polygenically determined
and continuously variable (i.e., a wide range of individuality exists in terms of the width of any single tooth).
Dental size is expressed through X-linked inheritance,
and racial differences are known. The upper lateral incisor shows the most variability in tooth size.
Tooth size and alveolar apical area size are the most
pertinent factors in the determination of the intraarch
component of malocclusion. Therefore, it is relevant to
consider these factors at length. The alveolar apical area
will respond to biomechanical stimulation from orthodontic appliances because intramembranous bone is
adaptive and compensatory. Crown size, on the other
hand, cannot be predictably influenced during growth by
clinical therapy.
The clinical crowns of all permanent teeth, except for
the third molar, are completely formed by middle childhood. Mesial-distal crown widths will not change after
crown formation unless affected by factors such as caries.
Hence, mesial-distal crown dimension is a stable factor in
the tooth size/arch size ratio. In an attempt to exploit the
clinical usefulness of crown dimension stability, tooth
size relationships are examined.
Comparison of primary and permanent mesial-distal
tooth sizes is one such consideration. Studies by Moorrees revealed that there is little about primary dentition
size that predicts permanent dentition size.57 Correlation
coefficient (r) values ranging from r = 0.2 to r = 0.6 are
indicative of the poor predictive relationship between primary mesial-distal tooth sizes and the sizes of their permanent successors. Correlation coefficients of r = 0.8 or
higher are required to make predictions for the individual

patient at chairside.32 The combined mesial-distal sizes of
all primary teeth and the combined sizes for the permanent teeth show a correlation of r = 0.5. Hence, Moorrees
concluded that the sizes of the primary teeth are of little
predictive value in estimating the sizes of their permanent successors.56
The strength of the size relationships among the permanent teeth, however, is clinically important for some
comparisons. Potter and Nance demonstrated that the
size of an individual tooth is highly correlated with the
size of the contralateral tooth in the same arch, as reflected in an r value of around 0.9.62 The combined mesial-distal dimensions of contralateral quadrants of teeth
show a slightly higher correlation of r = 0.95. Intraarch
comparisons of tooth groupings, such as mesial-distal
size of the lower incisors vs. mesial-distal sizes of the
lower canine and premolars combined, show only moderate correlation (r = 0.6) and therefore are not clinically
useful.63

COMPUTATION OF TOOTH SIZE/ARCH SIZE
BALANCE
The primary reason for dental arch malocclusion is imbalance between tooth size and alveolar apical size. In
the transition (mixed) dentition, it is possible to accurately determine if combined mesial-distal tooth size
will be balanced with alveolar arch size in later life. This
process of determination is called mixed dentition space
analysis. Many methods of mixed dentition space analysis are available.64,65 Common to all of these methods
is the attempt to determine the combined mesial-distal
size of the unerupted permanent canine and first and
second premolars. According to Horowitz and Hixon,
the lower dental arch is the focus for space analysis and
the basis of orthodontic diagnosis and treatment planning.33 The mandibular alveolar base can be modified
less therapeutically than can the upper alveolus and
therefore restricts treatment possibilities. The mandibular arch also undergoes less growth change than does the
upper arch.
Efficacy studies by Gardner,66 Kaplan and colleagues,67
and Staley and colleagues68-70 revealed one method to
be the most accurate in predicting the combined size of
the unerupted canine and premolars during the mixed
dentition. This method, originally devised by Hixon and
­Oldfather,63 has been refined by Bishara and Staley.71 In
summary, the analysis involves the following steps:
  
1.	Measure the combined width of the lower lateral and
central incisors on one side.
2.	Measure (directly from the radiograph) the crown
sizes of the unerupted 4-5 on the same side.
3.	Add the incisor and the premolar sizes.
4.	Refer to the prediction chart to determine the sizes of
the unerupted 3-4-5.
  
Techniques of mixed dentition space analysis allow for
estimation of the sizes of the unerupted canine and premolars on the lower arch. This size estimate must then
be compared with a measurement of the arch space available between the mesial aspect of the lower molar and the
distal aspect of the lateral incisor in the same quadrant.
The difference between the combined width of the three

Chapter 20

unerupted permanent teeth and this arch space has been
called leeway space.
The most favorable dental arch pattern is one in which
leeway space is excessive (i.e., combined size of unerupted canine and premolars is smaller than arch space available). If leeway space is deficient, dental arch crowding
predictably results. Average growth changes in the dental
arch are not great enough to compensate for leeway deficiencies.

COMPENSATIONS IN DENTAL ARCH
DEVELOPMENT
Tooth size/arch size imbalances result in dental arch conditions that are less than ideal. When combined mesialdistal tooth size exceeds alveolar arch size, compensatory
adjustments occur, resulting in dental arch crowding, excessive curve of Spee, or deviant axial tooth inclinations.
Dental spacing results when alveolar arch size exceeds the
combined mesial-distal size of the teeth.
Competent treatment planning during the mixed dentition must account not only for differences between the
size of unerupted canine and premolars and the space
available for them, but also for compensating dental factors. Ideal dental arch status provides a model for such
planning. Each compensating factor (i.e., crowding, spacing, excess occlusal curve, or deviant axial tooth position) can be appraised relative to an ideal dental arch.
Alteration of a crowded arch to an ideally aligned arch is
not possible without creating extra space to resolve the
crowding. Consequently, a competent dental arch treatment plan must specify the manner in which space will
be clinically created. Several means are available for creating dental arch space:
  
1.	Move molars distally.
2.	Decrease the mesial-distal dimension of the teeth
present in the arch.
3.	Increase the buccal-lingual axial inclination of the
incisors.
4.	Reduce the number of teeth in the arch by extraction.
  
Resolution of an excessive occlusal curve also requires
more space. Merrifield indicated that, generally, for each
millimeter of excessive occlusal curve, 1 mm of arch
length space is required.72 For labially inclined incisors
to be uprighted, arch length space is also required. In

n

Growth of the Face and Dental Arches

387

c­ontrast, more arch length is created when retroclined
incisors are proclined through therapy; the length of the
arch is increased by repositioning the incisal edges from a
lingual to a more labial position.

MAINTENANCE OF OVERALL PATTERN
Space analysis combined with evaluation of the impact of
compensating factors on dental arch status is the means
by which overall space requirements for the lower arch
can be determined during the mixed dentition phase.
Overall space appraisal during the mixed dentition is
highly indicative of future arch status. The condition presented during the mixed dentition will, to a high degree,
be maintained in the permanent dental arch. For this reason, a nonideal adult arch status can be anticipated early,
and many undesirable conditions can be resolved during
the transition from the primary to the permanent dental
arch.
Overall space appraisal is typically expressed as millimeters of arch length space excess or deficiency. Dental
arch space excess (1 to 2 mm) is a relatively ideal situation. Clinically, little intervention is usually required
because mesial drifting of the permanent teeth often results in little or no crowding or residual spacing. Space
excess exceeding 3 to 4 mm, however, can lead to dental
arch problems. For example, congenital absence of one
or more teeth can leave so much arch space that mesial
drifting cannot compensate. Decisions favoring retention
of primary teeth as long as possible, extraction of primary
teeth and retention of space for later restorative prosthesis, or extraction followed by space closure must be made
as long-term planning decisions.
Space deficiencies less than -2 mm can usually be
managed with a lower lingual holding arch. Arch space
deficiencies of from -3 to -6 mm should be scrutinized
carefully. Typically, a space-regaining lower lingual arch
or arch length expansion treatment measure is indicated.
Arches with deficiencies in excess of -6 mm are candidates
for aggressive space-regaining techniques, dental arch
expansion treatment, or one of several serial extraction
sequences. The clinical approach to various conditions
of space excess and deficiency is based on overall space
appraisal (space analysis plus compensating factors), as
shown in Table 20-2.

Table 20-2
Clinical Disposition Guidelines for Various Dental Arch Space Conditions Resulting from Overall
Mixed Dentition Space Appraisal
Overall Appraisal

mm

Clinical Disposition

Large space excess
Space excess
Equivalency
Deficiency
Moderate deficiency
Large deficiency

Greater than +3
Less than +3 to 0
0
Less than -3 to 0
-3 to -6
Greater than -6

Long-term planning
No action; observation
Careful observation
Lower lingual holding arch
Space regaining or arch expansion
Space regaining, arch expansion,
or extraction

388

Chapter 20

n

Growth of the Face and Dental Arches

EFFECTS OF ENVIRONMENTAL FACTORS
ON DENTAL ARCH PATTERN
The primary determinant of dental arch malocclusion is
mesial-distal tooth size/arch size imbalance. Nevertheless,
secondary factors can dramatically influence the disposition of the dental arch during childhood. Dental arch
status is subject to the ravaging effects of environmental
factors that can include early loss of primary teeth, interproximal caries, pathology, ankylosis of primary teeth,
oral habits, trauma, and early eruption of permanent second molars.
The environmental factors most commonly affecting
dental arch status are probably caries and premature loss
of primary teeth. Early primary tooth loss and caries can
have a profound effect on dental arch status. Caries and
early loss of the primary first molars (D), second molars
(E), or both (D + E) result in a decrease in dental arch
length. A study by Northway and colleagues54 showed the
following
specific details:
  
1.	E loss had the most deleterious effect on dental arch
length.
2.	Early posterior primary loss resulted in space closure
of 2- to 4-mm per quadrant in both arches.
3.	Space loss was age-related in the upper but not in the
lower arch.
4.	Upper D loss typically resulted in blocked-out canines; upper E loss usually led to an impacted second
permanent premolar.
5.	The greatest space loss was caused by mesial molar
movement.
6.	More space was lost in the first year after premature
tooth loss than in successive years.
7.	No recovery of space was demonstrated during
growth in the upper arch, and little was found in the
lower arch.

SUMMARY
This chapter integrates basic growth principles with
patient appraisal to enhance diagnostic and treatmentplanning efficacy. Merging growth principles with dentofacial pattern brings to light specific growth features
pertinent to clinical patient-care decision-making. This
chapter focused on growth events germane to a better
understanding of malocclusion as it affects the face,
occlusion, and dental arches. Two themes were consistent throughout the chapter. First, overall pattern is
maintained from early childhood until growth completion. Growth change affects architecturally equivalent
structures in a balanced way. For this reason, craniofacial pattern can be predicted to a great extent. The best
estimation of future status is obtained by taking the
pattern present at an early age and adding the average
growth change. Second, dentofacial pattern changes regionally as an individual matures, and these maturation
changes are common in all healthy individuals. Regional variation introduced by the maturing process, however, is not great enough to alter the overall dentofacial
pattern.

REFERENCES
1.	Lucker GW, et al.: Psychological aspects of facial form,
Monograph No. 11, Craniofacial growth series, Ann Arbor,
1980, University of Michigan.
2.	Attanasio C, et al.: Fine tuning of craniofacial morphology by
distant-acting enhancers, Science 342:12410061–12410068,
2013.
3.	Mao JJ: Mechanobiology of craniofacial sutures, J Dent Res
81:810–816, 2002.
4.	Valadian I, Porter D: Physical growth and development: from
conception to maturity, Boston, 1977, John Wright-PSG.
5.	Garn SM: Genetics of dental development. In McNamara JA
Jr, editor: The biology of occlusal development, Monograph No.
7, Craniofacial growth series, Ann Arbor, 1977, University of
Michigan.
6.	Potter RH, et al.: A twin study on dental dimension. II, Independent genetic determinants, Am J Phys Anthropol 44:
397–412, 1976.
7.	Linder-Aronson S, Leighton BC: A longitudinal study of the
development of the posterior nasopharyngeal wall between
3 and 6 years of age, Eur J Orthod 5:47–58, 1983.
8.	Enlow DH, Hans MG: Essentials of facial growth, Philadelphia,
1996, WB Saunders.
9.	Scott JH: The nasal septum, Br Dent J 95:37, 1953.
10.	Sperber GH: Craniofacial embryology, ed 3, Boston, 1981, John
Wright-PSG.
11.	Latham RA: Maxillary development and growth: the septopremaxillary ligament, J Anat 107:471, 1974.
12.	Gange RJ, Johnston LE: The septopremaxillary attachment
and midfacial growth, Am J Orthod 66:71–81, 1979.
13.	Moss ML, Salentijn L: The primary role of functional matrices in facial growth, Am J Orthod 55:566–577, 1969.
14.	Moss ML, Salentijn L: The capsular matrix, Am J Orthod
56:474–490, 1969.
15.	Koski KL: Cranial growth centers: facts or fallacies? Am J Orthod 54:566–583, 1968.
16.	Dixon AD, et al.: Fundamentals of craniofacial growth, Boca
Raton, FL, 1997, CRC Press, pp 121–124.
17.	Enlow DH, Hans MG: Handbook of facial growth, Philadelphia, 1996, WB Saunders.
18.	Linder-Aronson S: Effects of adenectomy on dentition and
nasopharynx, Am J Orthod 65:1–15, 1974.
19.	Harvold EP, et al.: Primate experiments on oral respiration,
Am J Orthod 79:359–372, 1981.
20.	Scott JH: The growth of the human face, Proc R Soc Med 47:5,
1954.
21.	Meredith HV: Changes in form of the head and face during
childhood, Growth 24:215–264, 1960.
22.	Ranly DM: A synopsis of craniofacial growth, New York, 1980,
Appleton & Lange.
23.	Stramud L: External and internal cranial base, Acta Odontol
Scand 17:239, 1959.
24.	Bergersen EO: The directions of facial growth from infancy
to adulthood, Angle Orthod 36:18–43, 1960.
25.	Brodie AG: Facial patterns: a theme on variation, Angle
­Orthod 16:75–87, 1946.
26.	Broadbent BH Sr, et al.: Bolton standards of dentofacial developmental growth, St. Louis, 1975, Mosby.
27.	Darwis WE, et al.: Assessing growth and development of the
facial profile, Pediatr Dent 25:103–108, 2003.
28.	Ackerman JL, Proffit WR: The characteristics of malocclusion: a modern approach to classification and diagnosis, Am
J Orthod 56:443–454, 1969.
29.	Angle EH: Treatment of malocclusion of the teeth, ed 7, Philadelphia, 1907, SS White Dental Mfg.

Chapter 20

30.	Bell WH, et al.: Surgical correction of dentofacial deformities,
Vol. 1, Philadelphia, 1980, WB Saunders.
31.	Cox NH, van der Linden F: Facial harmony, Am J Orthod
60:175–183, 1971.
32.	Patterson CN, Powell DG: Facial analysis in patient evaluation for physiologic and cosmetic surgery, Laryngoscope
84:1004–1019, 1979.
33.	Horowitz SL, Hixon EH: The nature of orthodontic diagnosis,
St. Louis, 1966, Mosby.
34.	Andrews LF: Six keys to normal occlusion, Am J Orthod
62:296–309, 1972.
35.	Roth RH: Functional occlusion for the orthodontist. Part III,
J Clin Orthod 15:174, 1981.
36.	Enlow DH: A morphogenetic analysis of facial growth, Am J
Orthod 52:283–299, 1966.
37.	Farkas LG: Anthropology of the head and face in medicine, New
York, 1981, Elsevier.
38.	Legan HL, Burstone CJ: Soft tissue cephalometric analysis for
orthognathic surgery, J Oral Surg 38:744–752, 1980.
39.	Enlow DH, et al.: A procedure for the analysis of intrinsic
facial form and growth, Am J Orthod 56:6–23, 1969.
40.	Martinez-Maza C, et al.: Postnatal changes in the growth
dynamics of the human face revealed from bone modelling
patterns, J Anat 223:228–241, 2013.
41.	Balbach DR: The cephalometric relationship between the
morphology of the mandible and its future occlusal position,
Angle Orthod 39:29–41, 1969.
42.	McNamara JA, Carlson DS: Quantitative analysis of temporomandibular joint adaptations to protrusive function, Am J
Orthod 76:593–611, 1979.
43.	Graber TM, Swain BF: Orthodontics: current principles and techniques, St. Louis, 1985, Mosby.
44.	Mellion ZJ, et al.: The pattern of facial skeletal growth and its
relationship to various common indexes of maturation, Am J
Orthod Dentofacial Orthop 143:845–854, 2013.
45.	Leighton BC: Early recognition of normal occlusion. In
McNamara JA, editor: The biology of occlusion development,
Monograph No. 7, Craniofacial growth series, Ann Arbor,
1977, University of Michigan.
46.	Arya BS, et al.: Prediction of first molar occlusion, Am J
­Orthod 63:610–621, 1973.
47.	Carlsen DB, Meredith HV: Biologic variation in selected
relationships of opposing posterior teeth, Angle Orthod 30:
162–173, 1960.
48.	HEW reports on occlusion: summary and discussion, J Clin
Orthod 12:849–862, 1978.
49.	Friel S: Occlusion: observations on its development from infancy to old age, Int J Orthod 13:322–341, 1927.
50.	Lewis SJ, Lehman IA: Observations of the growth changes in
the teeth and dental arches, Dent Cosmos 70:480, 1929.
51.	Sanin C, Savara BS: The development of excellent occlusion,
Am J Orthod 61:345–352, 1972.
52.	Moyers RA: Handbook of orthodontics, ed 3, Chicago, 1973,
Mosby.

n

Growth of the Face and Dental Arches

389

53.	da Silva LP, Gleiser R: Occlusal development between primary and mixed dentitions: a 5-year longitudinal study,
J Dent Child 75:287–294, 2008.
54.	Northway WM, et al.: Effects of premature loss of deciduous
molars, Angle Orthod 54:295–329, 1984.
55.	Nery EB, Oka SW: Developmental stages of the human dentition. In Melmich M, et al.: eds. Clinical dysmorphology of orofacial structures, Boston, 1982, John Wright-PSG.
56.	Moorrees CFA: The dentition of the growing child, Cambridge,
MA, 1959, Harvard University Press.
57.	Moorrees CFA: Growth studies of the dentition: a review, Am
J Orthod 55:600–616, 1969.
58.	Anderson AA: The dentition and occlusal development
in children of African American descent, Angle Orthod 77:
421–429, 2007.
59.	Van der Linden FPGM: Transition of the human dentition,
Monograph No. 13, Craniofacial growth series, Ann Arbor,
1982, University of Michigan.
60.	Ten Cate AR: Formation of supporting bone in association
with periodontal ligament organization in the mouse, Arch
Oral Biol 20:137–138, 1975.
61.	Fränkel R: Decrowding during eruption under the screening influence of vestibular shields, Am J Orthod 65:372–406,
1974.
62.	Potter RH, Nance WE: A twin study on dental dimension.
I, Discordance, asymmetry and mirror imagery, Am J Phys
Anthropol 44:391–395, 1976.
63.	Hixon EH, Oldfather RE: Estimation of the sizes of unerupted
cuspid and bicuspid teeth, Angle Orthod 28:236–240, 1958.
64.	Melgaco CA, et al.: Mandibular permanent first molar and
incisor width as predictor of mandibular canine and premolar width, Am J Orthod Dentofacial Orthop 132:340–345, 2007.
65.	Durgekar SC, Naik V: Evaluation of Moyers mixed dentition
analysis in school children, Indian J Dent Res 20:26–30, 2009.
66.	Gardner RB: A comparison of four methods of predicting
arch length, Am J Orthod 75:387–398, 1979.
67.	Kaplan RG, et al.: An analysis of three mixed dentition analyses, J Dent Res 56:1337–1343, 1977.
68.	Staley RN, Kerber PE: A revision of the Hixon and Oldfather mixed dentition prediction method, Am J Orthod 78:
296–302, 1980.
69.	Staley RN: Prediction of the widths of unerupted canines and
premolars, J Am Dent Assoc 108:185–190, 1984.
70.	Staley RN, et al.: Prediction of lower canine and premolar
widths in the mixed dentition, Am J Orthod 76:300–309,
1979.
71.	Bishara SE, Staley RN: Mixed-dentition mandibular arch
length analysis: a step-by-step approach using the revised Hixon-Oldfather prediction method, Am J Orthod 86:
130–135, 1984.
72.	Merrifield LL: Differential diagnosis with total space analysis,
J Charles Tweed Foundation 6:10–15, 1978.

CHAPTER

21

Cephalometrics and Facial
Aesthetics: The Key to Complete
Treatment Planning
s John T. Krull, George E. Krull, and Jeffrey A. Dean

For additional resources, please visit the

website.

CHAPTER OUTLINE
RADIOGRAPHIC TECHNIQUE
Lateral Head Film
Frontal (Posteroanterior) Film
CEPHALOMETRIC TRACING
TECHNIQUE
REFERENCE POINTS FOR LATERAL
TRACING
REFERENCE LINES, ANGLES,
AND PLANES
INTERPRETATION OF
MEASUREMENTS
LATERAL CEPHALOMETRIC
ASSESSMENT
Maxillary Skeletal
Maxillary Dental
Mandibular Skeletal

Mandibular Dental
Vertical
Soft Tissue
FRONTAL (POSTEROANTERIOR)
CEPHALOMETRIC ASSESSMENT
DIRECTIONS OF GROWTH
COMPUTERIZED CEPHALOMETRIC
DIAGNOSIS AND TREATMENT
PLANNING
Digital Imaging
ANTEROPOSTERIOR INTERARCH
DISCREPANCIES
Class I
Class II Division I
Class II Division II
Class III

I

n studying a case of malocclusion, give no thought to
the methods of treatment or appliances until the case
shall have been classified and all peculiarities and
variations from the normal in type, occlusion, and facial
lines have been thoroughly comprehended. Then the requirements and proper plan of treatment become apparent.
—Edward H. Angle

Cephalometrics, the assessment of craniofacial dimensions, particularly the ethnographic determination
of cranial morphology, is an ancient skill practiced by
anthropologists for centuries.
Beauty and harmony are the traditional guiding principles used to assess facial proportions, although the definition of beauty may change as civilizations change. Greek
sculpture during the golden age of art (fourth century
bc) shows facial proportions very similar to those found
­desirable today. Basic facial features of Greek male and female figures appear to be depicted identically, with most
sculpture angles within 5° of contemporary standards; the
exceptions are a more acute mentolabial sulcus and nasofacial angle for the ancient Greek ideal.
In the early twentieth century, dentistry began to include the concepts of facial harmony and balance in the
theory and practice of cephalometrics. In 1922 ­
Simon
390

FACIAL TYPES
Mesofacial Pattern
Dolichofacial Pattern
Brachyfacial Pattern
VERTICAL ARCH DISCREPANCIES
Open Bite
Deep Bite
ANGLE CLASSIFICATION OF
OCCLUSION
Descriptive Skeletal and Dental
Evaluation
EVALUATION OF FACIAL AESTHETICS
Frontal View
Profile View

introduced this modern era with the development of
gnathostatics, a photographic technique that related the
teeth and their respective bony bases to each other and
to specific craniofacial structures. Although Racini and
Carrera obtained the first x-ray films of the skull by the
standard lateral view in 1926, it was not until the introduction of the cephalometer by Broadbent in 1931 that
the science of cephalometrics became standardized. This
sophisticated form of radiography enabled the practitioner to identify specific problem areas of craniofacial
disproportion and devise detailed therapeutic interventions. Through the contributions of investigators such as
Brodie, Downs, Reidel, Steiner, Tweed, and Ricketts, the
clinical application of cephalometrics has developed the
techniques that permit the observation of discrepancies
observed in the mandible, maxilla, dental units, and softtissue profile.
The primary aim of cephalometric analysis is to localize malocclusion within a tracing of facial bone and
soft-tissue structures. The analysis is performed by using
standardized cephalometric landmarks to construct lines,
angles, and imaginary planes, which permits the linear
and angular assessment of dental and facial relationships
as seen on radiographic films of the head and face. These
findings are compared with established ­normal values,

Chapter 21

n

Cephalometrics and Facial Aesthetics: The Key to Complete Treatment Planning

391

70%

Figure 21-1 Bell-shaped curve illus-

trating the approximate distribution
of biologic variables in the general
population.

0.5%

12.5%

12.5%

2%
2

and an individualized treatment protocol is developed for
orthopedic, orthodontic, and orthognathic therapies.
The science of cephalometrics has often been referred
to as a “numbers game” and has the reputation of being
difficult to master. There appears to be a universal search
for a reliable group of numbers that will ultimately lead
one to an accurate diagnosis. Such a search is futile because
all cephalometric measurements may at times lead one to
an erroneous conclusion. However, an accurate, in-depth
analysis provides one with an assessment of dentofacial
and craniofacial morphology. A cephalometric radiograph
furnishes one with a static analysis, whereas subsequent
films allow the clinician to follow the growth patterns of
the adolescent patient on a longitudinal basis. In addition,
comparison of serial cephalograms of the same patient
may allow some developmental predictions to be made.
The use of cephalometrics serves to confirm the diagnosis and makes it possible to include the morphology
of the cranium when alternative treatment modalities are
considered. In patient care, cephalometrics can provide
valuable data when treatment is first initiated and can
serve a monitoring function during the course of orthodontic care. On completion of treatment, cephalometric
radiology enables one to assess the relative degree of posttreatment stability and evaluate treatment results produced by various mechanical and appliance selections.
Cephalometric numbers or central tendencies have
been developed to serve as guidelines in evaluation of the
patient. Dentists must keep in mind that they are treating
individuals, not averages, and that the numbers merely
help or guide in the formulation of an accurate diagnosis and treatment plan. Because of individual anatomic,
biological, and environmental variations, it is imperative
that the clinician consider several factors to achieve a
comprehensive case analysis. Any attempt to simplify the
analysis is likely to lead to an erroneous conclusion.
The norm is commonly referred to as the mean or average. However, the norm, as it is applied in cephalometrics,
is not a set of averages. The average patient in any given
population will generally deviate from the norm because
the norm is derived from samples demonstrating ideal
dental occlusions of the Class I variety.
Most biological variables are randomly distributed in
the population and can be graphically illustrated by a
bell-shaped curve (Fig. 21-1). Within this curve, approximately 70% of any given population lies within one standard deviation of the mean and 95% of the population

2%
1

Normal
Standard deviation

1

0.5%

2

falls within two standard deviations. Throughout this
chapter, the statistical concept of standard deviation is
referred to as clinical deviation (CD).
As a general rule, the goal in treatment planning is to
treat in the direction of cephalometric norms. The clinical advantages include the following:
  
1.	A more favorable and predictable aesthetic result
2.	Greater posttreatment stability
3.	Improved function and periodontal health

RADIOGRAPHIC TECHNIQUE
The technique used in cephalometric radiology has been
standardized to permit the comparison of initial and subsequent films for the same patient so that growth can be
assessed and treatment progress monitored.
This standardization requires that the equipment include a headholder (cephalostat) and an x-ray tube positioned at a distance of 60 inches from the midsagittal
plane of the subject and that the distance from the midsagittal plane of the patient to the film be approximately
7.5 inches (Fig. 21-2). The cephalostat maintains a reproducible spatial relationship with respect to the position
of the patient’s head, the film, and the x-ray source. The
most common device uses a counterbalanced beam with
the radiographic tube on one end and the cephalostat on
the other. This entire unit can be adjusted vertically to
compensate for variations in patient height.
The patient is positioned in the cephalostat by means
of laterally adjusted ear rods and a vertically adjusted nasal piece (Fig. 21-3). The nasal piece allows the clinician to
orient the patient’s head so that the Frankfort horizontal
plane (a plane extending from the tragus of the ear to the
inferior border of the orbital rim) is parallel to the floor.
The ear posts should be centrally aligned to the source of
radiation so that a transporionic axis is established.

LATERAL HEAD FILM
For a lateral head radiograph, the patient is first positioned so that the left side of the face is tangent to an 8
× 10-inch film cassette, which permits less magnification
and less distortion of the left-sided structures (Fig. 21-4).
The film cassette should be positioned as closely as possible to the patient to minimize the effects of magnification, maximize resolution, and standardize the ­technique.
The distance from the film cassette to the p
­ atient’s midsagittal plane should be recorded to allow for ­comparison

392

Chapter 21

n

Cephalometrics and Facial Aesthetics: The Key to Complete Treatment Planning

Figure 21-2 Wall-mounted, counterbalanced cephalometer. (Courtesy Dr. William W. Merow.)

Figure 21-4 Lateral cephalometric film.

intensifying screens allow for a reduction of radiographic
exposure while increasing the clarity of the radiographic
image. Because the film range does not provide for sharp
skeletal and soft-tissue contrast, a movable aluminum
screen attached to the cassette must be used over the softtissue profile area to reduce the radiation and provide a
better differential contrast between the two tissue types.

FRONTAL (POSTEROANTERIOR) FILM
Figure 21-3 Patient positioned in the cephalostat.

of serial films. Generally, the film is obtained with the
mandible in its most retruded position and the lips in
repose. Use of additional positions may be indicated. Once
the patient has been positioned, the x-ray beam should
enter through the ear rods perpendicular to the film.
Grids and intensifying screens are accessories used to
improve the quality of the radiographic image. Rare-earth

Most diagnostic features related to vertical and anteroposterior (AP) problems are evident from the lateral film;
however, severe maxillary transverse deficiencies or facial
asymmetries may be better diagnosed using a posteroanterior (PA) film (Fig. 21-5). The patient is oriented facing
the film cassette, with the ear rods and nasion piece positioning the patient so that the midsagittal and Frankfort
planes are at right angles to the film cassette. After the
patient’s head is positioned so that the central x-ray beam

Chapter 21

n

Cephalometrics and Facial Aesthetics: The Key to Complete Treatment Planning

393

Figure 21-6 Lateral cephalometric tracing.

Figure 21-5 Frontal (posteroanterior) cephalometric film.

(Courtesy Dr. William W. Merow.)

passes through the head at the level of the transporionic
axis and at its midpoint, the film cassette is moved into
contact with the patient’s nose. Because more radiation
is required for this view, the milliamperage must be increased over that used in the lateral film technique.

CEPHALOMETRIC TRACING TECHNIQUE
Precise localization of the anatomic landmarks used in
cephalometric analysis requires adequate knowledge of
the radiographic and anatomic appearance of the facial
bones and their relationships to adjacent structures.
Various features are discernible: lines, shadows, the
projections of bony structures, and contours of various
densities. All of these make it difficult for the clinician
to interpret and identify the anatomic relationships. A
clear understanding of craniofacial structures and their
relative spatial relationships is imperative before a lateral
head film is traced.
Figure 21-6 depicts a lateral cephalometric tracing.
The lateral tracing should include the soft-tissue outline,
bony profile, outline of the mandible, posterior and anterior cranial base, odontoid process of the axis, anterior
lip of the foramen magnum, clivus, planum orbitale,
sella ­turcica, orbit, pterygomaxillary fissure, floor of the
nose, roof of the palate, and body of the hyoid bone.

In addition to the bony tissues, at least the first permanent molars and the most anterior maxillary and
mandibular incisors are commonly included. In certain
situations it may be desirable to trace other teeth or the
complete dentition, as shown in Figure 21-6.
For the tracing to be made, the radiograph is placed
on a view box with the facial profile to the right side. Acetate tracing paper (0.003 matte) is then placed over the
radiograph with the matte side up. With a sharp No. 2 or
3H drawing pencil, all the necessary structures are traced
(Video 21-1: Cephalometrics). Because all x-rays become
divergent once they emanate from the collimator, magnification of the subject will result, and a double-image
effect will occur along the inferior border of the mandible
and the area of the posterior teeth. All paired structures
will produce double images on the head films. Because
left-sided structures are magnified less by the radiographic
beam and are considered more accurately rendered, the
outline of these structures can be traced, although some
prefer to make the tracing lines bisect bilateral images.
A PA cephalometric radiograph, as illustrated in Figure
21-5, can be of significant diagnostic value in cases demonstrating mandibular displacement, facial asymmetry,
severe posterior crossbite, or other types of bony dysplasia. Cephalometric analysis and a thorough and systematic clinical examination of these patients often reveal
malocclusions accompanied by mandibular shifts when
the patient is in maximum occlusion.
The PA radiograph is traced in the same manner as the
lateral film. Figure 21-7 illustrates the important skeletal
and dental structures that must be traced for an accurate
and complete analysis. Even though many practitioners
are trained in cephalometrics using the manual tracing

394

Chapter 21

n

Cephalometrics and Facial Aesthetics: The Key to Complete Treatment Planning

LZF

RZF

Po

Ba

ANS
LJ

N

S

Cd

Pt

Ar

Ptm

O
CF

PNS

RJ

ANS
A

6

1

6

I

1

Go

B

I
LAG

RAG
Me

Pg
Gn

Figure 21-8 Lateral tracing with cephalometric referMe

ence points. (Adapted from Dr. William W. Merow.)

Figure 21-7 Frontal (posteroanterior) cephalometric tracing

(see also Fig. 21-10). ANS, Anterior nasal spine; I, I (incisor)
point; LAG, left antegonial notch; LJ, left jugal process of
maxillary tuberosity; LZF, left zygomaticofrontal suture; Me,
menton; RAG, right antegonial notch; RJ, right jugal process
of maxillary tuberosity; RZF, right zygomaticofrontal suture.
methodology, contemporary cephalometric tracing is
now most often done digitally with a computer software
program on a digital cephalogram. The principles of the
tracing are the same; only the tools are different.

REFERENCE POINTS FOR LATERAL
TRACING
The ultimate diagnostic value of the cephalometric analysis is dependent on the initial accurate identification and
localization of anatomic and anthropologic points (Fig.
21-8). These landmarks are used to construct the lines,
angles, and planes used to make a two-dimensional assessment of the patient’s craniofacial and dental relationships.
Although each analysis is completed in two dimensions,
when the lateral and PA analyses for the same patient
are considered together, a three-dimensional simulation
emerges to contribute to the overall diagnosis and treatment plan. The following reference points are used in this
chapter (see Fig. 21-8):
Sella turcica (S, or sella). The midpoint of the hypophyseal fossa. This is the ovoid area of the spheroid
bone that contains the pituitary gland.
Nasion (N). The external junction of the nasofrontal
suture in the median plane. If the suture is not visible,
this point is located at the deepest concavity of the two
bones.
Orbitale (O). The most inferior point on the external
border of the orbit.
Condylion (Cd). The most superior point on the
­articular head of the condyle.
Anterior nasal spine (ANS). The most anterior projection of the anterior nasal spine of the maxilla in the
median plane.

A point (subspinale, or A). The deepest point of
the curvature of the anterior maxilla between the ANS
and the alveolar crest. Although the A point may change
with treatment, it represents the most forward point of
the maxilla.
B point (supramentale, or B). The most posterior
point on the outer curve of the mandibular alveolar process between the alveolar crest and the bony chin. The B
point delineates the most anterior point of the mandible
in the median plane.
Pogonion (Pg). The most anterior point on the midsagittal mandibular symphysis.
Menton (Me). The most inferior point of the mandibular symphysis.
Gnathion (Gn). A constructed point that is formed
by the intersection of the facial and mandibular planes.
Gonion (Go). Another constructed point that is represented by the intersection of the lines tangent to the
posterior margin of the ascending ramus and the mandibular plane.
Articulare (Ar). The point of intersection of the
­posterior margin of the ascending ramus and the outer
margin of the cranial base.
Porion (Po). A point located at the most superior
point of the external auditory meatus or the superior aspect of the metal ring that is a component of the left ear
rod of the cephalostat.
Basion (Ba). The most inferior posterior point on the
occipital bone that corresponds to the anterior margin of
the foramen magnum.
Pterygomaxillary fissure (Ptm). A teardrop-shaped
fissure, the posterior wall of which is created by the anterior borders of the pterygoid plates of the sphenoid bone;
the anterior wall represents the posterior border of the
maxilla (maxillary tuberosity). The tip of this fissure denotes the posterior extent of the maxilla.
Posterior nasal spine (PNS). The tip of the posterior spine of the palatine bone. This landmark is usually
not visible even on well-exposed lateral head films; therefore it is a constructed point that is represented by the

Chapter 21

Cephalometrics and Facial Aesthetics: The Key to Complete Treatment Planning

n

intersection of a continuation of the anterior wall of the
pterygopalatine fossa and the floor of the nose. It also denotes the posterior limit of the maxilla.
Pt point (Pt). The intersection of the inferior border of
the foramen rotundum with the posterior wall of the Ptm.
CF point (center of face). The cephalometric landmark formed by the intersection of the Frankfort horizontal plane and a perpendicular line through Pt.

REFERENCE LINES, ANGLES, AND PLANES
Linear assessment is derived when two reference points
are connected. Angular measurements are possible when
three points are used. Planes (and some lines) are actually imaginary when the cephalometric tracing is viewed
because the planes are at right angles to the tracing and
can be seen only as a line on the two-dimensional tracing (Fig. 21-9). In cephalometric analysis the dentist
must become accustomed to thinking in three dimensions while viewing a two-dimensional representation.
Therefore a point on the tracing may not only be a point
but also may represent a line (or axis). A line on the tracing may actually be a line (or axis) or it may represent
a plane.
Several lines or planes are used in different cephalometric analyses, although one line or plane generally
serves as the major reference on which the entire analysis is based. Two common references are the sella-nasion
plane (anterior cranial base) and the Frankfort horizontal
plane.
The basic units of cephalometric analysis are angles and
distances (lines). Measurements may be treated as absolute
values, or they may be related to one another and expressed as relative proportions. These measurements and
interrelationships provide the basic framework for describing craniofacial abnormalities. The following definitions help explain the planes of reference used in this
chapter (see Fig. 21-9).

395

Frankfort horizontal plane (FH). This plane is
constructed from the porion (Po) to the orbitale (O) and
represents the basic horizontal plane of the head.
Sella-Nasion plane (SN). This plane is represented
by a line connecting the sella (S) and the nasion (N). It
denotes the AP extent of the anterior cranial base. This
reference plane is of questionable diagnostic value in true
mandibular prognathism.
Occlusal plane (OP). This plane separates the maxillary and mandibular permanent molars (or, in younger
patients, the primary second molars) and passes through
the contact between the most anterior maxillary and
mandibular incisors. If the incisors are not in contact, the
line passes midway between the incisal edges. Ideally, the
OP is nearly parallel to both the palatal plane (PP) and
the FH.
Facial plane (FP). A line constructed through the nasion (N) perpendicular to the FH represents this plane.
Mandibular plane (MP). The mandibular plane
is constructed as a tangent to the inferior border of the
mandible.
Pterygoid vertical plane (PTV). This plane is represented by a line perpendicular to the FH through the Pt
point. Studies have shown that the intersection of the FH
and the PTV is extremely stable because growth has little
effect on this point. An overall view of patient growth
may be gained by evaluation of serial cephalometric films
on which the FH and the PTV are superimposed. The PTV
represents a basic vertical reference plane.
Basion-Nasion plane (BN). This plane passes
through the basion (Ba) and nasion (N). The plane represents the cranial base and is the dividing plane between
the cranium and the face.
Facial axis (FX). This line is constructed from the Pt
point through the gnathion. The FX ideally crosses the
BN at a right angle.
Palatal plane (PP). This plane extends through the
anterior nasal spine (ANS) and posterior nasal spine (PNS).
The relationship of this plane to the FH is useful in evaluation of the treatment changes occurring in the maxilla.

INTERPRETATION OF MEASUREMENTS
N

SN

S

BN

Po

FH
FP

Ba

PP
ANS

PNS

OP
PTV
MP
FX

Figure 21-9 Cephalometric reference lines and

planes. (Adapted from Dr. William W. Merow.)

The objectives of cephalometric interpretation are summarized as follows:
  
1.	To define both the skeletal and facial types
2.	To evaluate the relationship between the maxillary
and mandibular basal bones
3.	To assess the dental relationships (the spatial relationships between the teeth, maxilla, mandible, and
cranial base)
4.	To locate the malocclusion within the dentofacial complex and analyze its origin (skeletal or dentoalveolar)
5.	To study the facial soft-tissue contours with respect to
the cause of the malocclusion
6.	To consider the impact of the various options for correcting the malocclusion on the facial contours and
on the skeletal and dental components
7.	To facilitate selection of a treatment plan
8.	To evaluate the results of various soft-tissue surgical
procedures

396

Chapter 21

n

Cephalometrics and Facial Aesthetics: The Key to Complete Treatment Planning

LATERAL CEPHALOMETRIC ASSESSMENT
MAXILLARY SKELETAL

SNA: The angle between SN and N–A point line
Clinical norm: 82°
Clinical deviation: 2°
Interpretation: Establishes horizontal location of
the maxilla. Deviation in cranial base (SN, angulation,
or length) or vertical maxillary excess proves that this
measurement is unreliable. Therefore reduced emphasis
should be given in these instances.
Maxillary depth: The angle formed by the intersection of the FH and N–A point planes
Clinical norm: 90°
Clinical deviation: 3°
Interpretation: Indicates horizontal position of maxilla. Class II skeletal patterns caused by a prognathic maxilla show values exceeding 90°. Chronic thumb-suckers
generally demonstrate large values.
Maxillary length: The measurement of the line extending from Cd to A point
Clinical norm: 85 mm (female), 87 mm (male)
Clinical deviation: 6 mm
Interpretation: Increases 1 mm per year until adult size
is attained (95 to 100 mm). This measurement determines
if the Class II or Class III skeletal pattern is attributable to
a long or short maxilla, respectively.

ANB: The difference between the SNA and SNB angles
Clinical norm: +2°
Clinical deviation: 2°
Interpretation: Indicates the horizontal relationship
between maxilla and mandible. Positive values indicate
that the maxilla is forward of the mandible, whereas negative values indicate a Class III skeletal relationship.

MAXILLARY DENTAL

Chapter 21

n

Cephalometrics and Facial Aesthetics: The Key to Complete Treatment Planning

397

102° indicate angular incisor protrusion, whereas values significantly less than that demonstrate angular retrusion. It is also important to take into consideration
that the incisal two thirds of the maxillary c­entral
incisor crown is narrower and relatively flat. The la­
bial surface has its greatest height at the center of the
gingival margin and curves to the incisal edge. Ideally,
the incisal two thirds should be parallel to the facial
plane (FP).
Maxillary incisor AP position: The horizontal distance from the facial surface of the maxillary central incisors to the N–A point line
Clinical norm: 4 mm
Clinical deviation: 2 mm
Interpretation: Indicates horizontal position of the
maxillary incisors. Values in excess of 6 mm indicate
anterior dental protrusion, whereas values 1 mm or less
show dental retrusion.
Upper molar position: The horizontal distance
from PTV to the distal surface of the maxillary first
molar
Clinical norm: Chronologic age of the patient + 3 mm
(e.g., a 10-year-old has a clinical norm of 10 + 3 = 13
mm). The growth change is approximately 1 mm per year
through the years of active growth.
Clinical deviation: 3 mm
Interpretation: Determines if the dental malocclusion is caused by the AP position of the maxillary
molar. It is important in treatment planning considerations involving distal movement of the maxillary
molars.
Maxillary incisor to upper lip: The vertical distance between the inferior border of the upper lip and the
incisal edge of the maxillary incisor
Clinical norm: 3 mm
Clinical deviation: 1 mm
Interpretation: Gives an evaluation of the amount of
upper incisor in repose. Values of 5 mm or more may be
associated with vertical maxillary excess. This value must
be compared with upper lip length. Patients with short
upper lips will show more incisor at rest.

MANDIBULAR SKELETAL

Maxillary incisor angulation: The angle formed by
SN and the incisor long axis
Clinical norm: 102°
Clinical deviation: 3°
Interpretation: Relates the upper incisor angulation to the upper and middle face. Values well above

398

Chapter 21

n

Cephalometrics and Facial Aesthetics: The Key to Complete Treatment Planning

MANDIBULAR DENTAL

SNB: The angle formed between the SN and N–B point
planes
Clinical norm: 80°
Clinical deviation: 2°
Interpretation: Indicates horizontal location of the
mandible. Abnormal cranial base angulation and vertical facial excess will adversely affect the reliability of this
measurement.
Facial angle (depth): The angle formed between the
N-Pg and FH planes
Clinical norm: 87° at 9 years of age. Increases 0.33° per
year.
Clinical deviation: 3°
Interpretation: Locates the horizontal position of the
chin. Determines if the skeletal Class II or Class III relationship is attributable to a retrognathic or a prognathic
mandible.
Mandibular length: The absolute distance between
Cd and Gn
Clinical norm: 105 mm at 9 years of age with yearly
growth increments of 2 to 2.5 mm, reaching a maximum
of 120 to 130 mm. Generally 2 mm less in females than in
males at 9 years of age.
Clinical deviation: 6 mm
Interpretation: Determines whether the skeletal Class
II or Class III relationship is attributable to a small or large
mandible.

Mandibular incisor protrusion: The horizontal distance from the tip of the mandibular incisor to the A
point–Pg line
Clinical norm: +2 mm
Clinical deviation: 2.3 mm
Interpretation: Defines the AP position of the mandibular dental unit and quantifies the reciprocal relationship
of the maxillary and mandibular dental units. Not only

Chapter 21

n

Cephalometrics and Facial Aesthetics: The Key to Complete Treatment Planning

399

is this a key aesthetic relationship, but it also needs to be
correlated with a functional arch length analysis.
Incisor mandibular plane angle (IMPA): The inner angle between the long axis of the mandibular incisor
and MP
Clinical norm: 90°
Clinical deviation: 4°
Interpretation: Gives an evaluation of the angular position of the incisor to the mandibular basal bone.
Holdaway ratio: The ratio of the mandibular incisor
and Pg to the N–B point line
Clinical norm: 1:1
Clinical deviation: 2 mm
Interpretation: The AP position of the mandibular incisor and Pg should project equally from the N–B point line
for good facial balance.

VERTICAL

Posterior facial height: The linear distance between
Go and the CF point
Clinical norm: 55 mm for the average-sized patient at
8.5 years of age. Increases 1 mm per year.
Clinical deviation: 3.3 mm
Interpretation: Measures vertical growth of the ramus
and can therefore be of value in predicting clockwise or
counterclockwise growth patterns. Values less than 51
mm represent a leaning toward dolichofacial patterns,

whereas values in excess of 59 mm may indicate brachyfacial or counterclockwise growth trends.
Mandibular plane angle (FMA): The angle formed
by the intersection of FH and MP
Clinical norm: 26°. Decreases 1° every 4 years during
normal growth.
Clinical deviation: 4°
Interpretation: Values in excess of 31° may indicate
clockwise growth with dolichofacial growth trends,
whereas values less than 21° imply vertical deficiency as
often seen in brachyfacial growth patterns.
Facial axis angle: The angle between FX and BN
Clinical norm: 90°
Clinical deviation: 3.5°. Changes 1° every 3 years in
the average patient.
Interpretation: Expresses the ratio of facial height to
depth and thus indicates the direction of growth of the
chin. Values in excess of 94° may indicate counterclockwise growth and those less than 85° may imply clockwise
growth in brachyfacial and dolichofacial facial types, respectively.
Facial height: The vertical relationship between upper and lower facial height (N-ANS:ANS-M)
Clinical norm: Upper, 53 mm; lower, 65 mm
Interpretation: More important than the absolute
value is the ratio between upper and lower facial height,
which should be approximately 5:6 for a well-balanced
face.

400

Chapter 21

n

Cephalometrics and Facial Aesthetics: The Key to Complete Treatment Planning

SOFT TISSUE

Clinical norm: 0 mm
Clinical deviation: 2 mm
Interpretation: May be helpful in assessment of the
projection of the chin relative to FH.
Interlabial distance: The vertical distance between
the inferior aspect of the upper lip and the superior surface of the lower lip with the patient in repose
Clinical norm: 1.9 mm
Clinical deviation: 1.2 mm
Interpretation: High values indicate lip incompetence
and are often associated with hyperactivity of the mentalis muscle. Low values may be associated with overclosure.
Lip protrusion: The horizontal distance between the
lower lip and the aesthetic plane (E plane). The aesthetic
plane is a line connecting the tip of the nose and the most
anterior point on the soft-tissue chin.
Clinical norm: −2 mm at 8.5 years of age; decreases 0.2
mm per year. The values tend to decrease with age until
adult values of −5 mm are reached.
Clinical deviation: 2 mm
Interpretation: Indicates soft-tissue balance between
lips and profile (nose-chin). This measurement is important because it takes into account the variability in thickness of the soft-tissue chin.

FRONTAL (POSTEROANTERIOR)
CEPHALOMETRIC ASSESSMENT

Nasolabial angle: The angle formed by the intersection
of the lines tangent to the columella of the nose and the
upper lip
Clinical norm: 90° to 110°
Interpretation: Provides an assessment of the nose-toupper lip relationship. Values in excess of 114° may indicate upper lip retrusion, whereas values of 96° or less may
be associated with dental protrusion.
Zero meridian: The horizontal distance from the
chin to a line perpendicular to FH and tangent to the softtissue nasion

Frontal cephalometric points and planes are used to evaluate the overall relationships of the cranium, maxilla,
mandible, and denture from a frontal view. Figure 21-10
is a graphic representation of the points, lines, and planes
used in frontal cephalometric analysis.
Dental midline: The horizontal distance between
the maxillary and mandibular incisor midlines
Clinical norm: 0 mm
Clinical deviation: 1.5 mm
Interpretation: Determines dental midline asymmetry.
Maxillomandibular width: The horizontal distance between the jugal process of the maxilla and the
frontal facial plane
Clinical norm: 10 mm for patient of average size at 8½
years of age. Needs to be corrected for size.
Interpretation: Determines if a crossbite is skeletal in nature. Large values are associated with skeletal lingual crossbites, whereas lesser values indicate skeletal buccal crossbites.
Maxillomandibular midline: The angle formed by
the ANS-Me plane through ANS and perpendicular to the
zygomatic frontal suture plane
Clinical norm: 0 mm
Clinical deviation: 2 mm
Interpretation: Determines whether facial asymmetry
is attributable to total size discrepancy or a functional
shift of the mandible.
Denture to jaw midlines: The horizontal distance
between the midlines of the mandibular incisors and
maxilla and mandible
Clinical norm: 0 mm
Clinical deviation: 1.5 mm
Interpretation: Aids differential diagnosis between
denture shift and mandibular shift.

Chapter 21

n

Cephalometrics and Facial Aesthetics: The Key to Complete Treatment Planning

A

B

C

D

E

F

401

G
Figure 21-10 Frontal reference points (see also Fig. 21-7). A, LZF/RZF, bilateral points on the medial aspect of the zygomati-

cofrontal sutures at the intersections of the orbits. B, ANS, tip of anterior nasal spine. C, LJ/RJ, bilateral points on the jugal
processes and the intersection of the maxillary tuberosities and the zygomatic buttresses. D, LAG/RAG, points at the lateral
inferior margin of the antegonial protuberances of the mandible. E, Me, menton, point of the inferior border of the mandibular symphysis directly inferior to the mental protuberance. F, I point, a point selected at the interdental papilla of the upper
incisors at the junction of the crowns and gingiva. G, I point, a point selected at the interdental papilla of the lower incisors at
the junction of the crowns and gingiva.

Occlusal plane tilt: Measures the degree of parallelism between the occlusal plane and a line through the
zygomatic frontal sutures
Clinical norm: 0 mm
Clinical deviation: 2 mm
Interpretation: A skeletal asymmetry in addition to a
tilt in occlusal plane is usually a signal of possible temporomandibular joint dysfunction.
Maxillary width: The horizontal distance between
the jugal processes of the maxilla
Clinical norm: 61.9 mm at 9 years of age. Increases 0.6
mm per year.
Clinical deviation: 3 mm

Interpretation: Indicates the width of the maxilla. The
change in value is useful in cases involving sutural expansion of the palate.

DIRECTIONS OF GROWTH
The constructed gonial angle is formed by the intersection of the ascending ramus and the body of the mandible. This angle can be used as an initial assessment
of future mandibular growth. The direction of growth
is very important in the selection of a functional appliance if that method of treatment is indicated. In
cases such as mandibular prognathism, the information

402

Chapter 21

Cephalometrics and Facial Aesthetics: The Key to Complete Treatment Planning

n

COMPUTERIZED CEPHALOMETRIC
DIAGNOSIS AND TREATMENT PLANNING
The availability of inexpensive and powerful computers
in the dental office has made comprehensive cephalometric software a reliable tool for the practitioner. These
computer programs, in addition to providing accurate
models of the skeletal and soft-tissue anatomy, allow for
an accurate prediction of aesthetic results by the evaluation of the soft-tissue changes secondary to orthodontic
and orthopedic alterations in the hard tissues. One can
also evaluate multiple treatment plans and examine the
changes that would result relative to the soft tissue before
actually initiating a specific treatment plan.

Ar

Go
nia
l

Upper
compartment

e
gl
an

Ascending
ramal plane

DIGITAL IMAGING

Lower
compartment
Go
Man

dibu

lar p

lane

Me

Figure 21-11 Facial growth vector assessment and
the gonial angle.

would lead one to the conclusion that treatment might
best be delayed due to the possibility of latent mandibular growth.
The gonial angle is divided into two parts for determination of the angular relationship between the ascending
ramus and the body of the mandible. A line is constructed
between the nasion and the constructed gonial angle (facial depth line), dividing the gonial angle into upper and
lower compartments. As a general rule, the upper angle,
with a normal range of 52° to 55°, indicates horizontal
or counterclockwise growth. The lower angle, with a
range of 70° to 75°, is an indicator of vertical or clockwise
growth. The astute clinician needs to keep in mind that
growth rarely occurs in a straight line but rather exhibits
more of a curve (Fig. 21-11).
A larger upper angle would indicate a more forward
growth, whereas a larger lower angle would indicate
downward growth. Conversely, a small upper angle
would indicate clockwise growth and a small lower angle
would suggest counterclockwise growth.
Another method of assessing the direction of growth
is to divide the upper angle by the lower angle, resulting in a percentage. The numerical value can then be
compared with the numbers in the following list to give
an idea of the growth vector. A more in-depth analysis may be indicated in more difficult musculoskeletal
discrepancies.
Ideal growth: 70% to 78%
Clockwise tendency: 69.9% to 68.1%
Clockwise growth: ≤68%
Excessive clockwise growth: <60%
Counterclockwise tendency: 78.1% to 79.9%
Counterclockwise growth: ≥80%
Excessive counterclockwise growth: >88%

Imaging has been an important aspect of dental care since
the early 1900s. The x-ray was discovered by Wilhelm
Conrad Roentgen in late 1895. This discovery resulted
in a method whereby dental anatomy could be evaluated. Dr. Otto Walkoff took the first dental radiographs
in 1896, with an exposure time of 25 minutes. Later that
same year, advances were made in the field such that the
exposure time was reduced to 9 minutes. The first dental
radiographs were obtained in the United States that same
year by the Eastman Kodak Company. Finally, in 1919
Kodak produced the first dental x-ray films designed for
direct exposure. The F-speed film introduced in 2000 required 1/60th of the radiation of the 1919 films.
Over the years, dentistry has been on the cutting edge of
radiology. Dentistry entered a new era of diagnostic imaging when French dentist Francis Mouyen introduced digital imaging in 1987. This method creates images with the
use of a computer. In recent years, cone-beam computed
tomography (CT) has come into play. This digital imaging system can produce both two- and three-dimensional
images.
Digital imaging provides high-resolution images and
compared with conventional radiography, the patient
is exposed to reduced radiation. Additionally, digitally
generated images provide an accurate and reproducible
method of analysis. Digital radiographs used in conjunction with the appropriate software can generate threedimensional images and allow for an accurate evaluation
of anatomic structures. Improved image sharpness in, for
example, the central incisor region can be accomplished
by digital elimination of the shadows cast by the cervical
vertebrae. A more relevant image results in a more accurate diagnosis.
In 2001 the TOM OR-DVT-9000, the first dentomaxillofacial dedicated cone-beam CT machine, was developed
in the United States. Virtually every practitioner can benefit from this new technology. In the past few years, image centers have been established that allow clinicians in
larger cities to have access to these facilities. Stand-alone
software packages placed at office workstations enable
dentists to view a full range of sophisticated images. Software programs such as Dolphin (www.dolphinimaging
.com), In-Vivo Dental (www.anatomage.com), and V-Works
(www.cybermed.co.kr) enable dentists to view the data from
the CT machines.

Chapter 21

n

Cephalometrics and Facial Aesthetics: The Key to Complete Treatment Planning

ANTEROPOSTERIOR INTERARCH
DISCREPANCIES
CLASS I
A Class I occlusion is one in which the mesiobuccal cusp
tip of the maxillary first molar aligns with the buccal
groove of the mandibular first molar (Fig. 21-12). Because
of this sagittal relationship, most Class I occlusions demonstrate reasonably normal skeletal and soft-tissue profiles.

CLASS II DIVISION I
In Class II division I malocclusion, the mesiobuccal cusp
tip of the maxillary first molar is positioned anterior to
the buccal groove of the mandibular first molar (Fig.
21-13). The sagittal molar relationship of these patients
is referred to as a disto-occlusion as opposed to a neutroocclusion in patients with Class I occlusion. The exact
reason for this relationship may be skeletal, dental, or a
combination of the two. The nature of the problem can
be more accurately determined by the use of cephalometric analysis. This type of malocclusion is often characterized by excessive overjet in the anterior region. Unlike the
patient with Class I occlusion, these patients often exhibit
more downward growth, abnormal muscle pressure, and
a convex soft- and hard-tissue profile.
In vertical growth patterns in which the upper molars
are erupting along the facial axis and the upper incisors
are erupting in a protruded direction, space between the
upper molars and incisors is increased, which results in
the typical dental characteristics of the Class II division I
malocclusion.

Figure. 21-12 Class I occlusion.

403

CLASS II DIVISION II
The molar position observed in patients with Class II division II malocclusion is similar to that of those with Class II
division I malocclusion, although the excessive overjet associated with the latter is not seen (Fig. 21-14). The anterior
relationship of a Class II division II malocclusion is characterized by lingual tipping of the central incisors and labial
flaring of the lateral incisors. Whereas patients with Class
II division I malocclusion show a weak chin, patients with
division II malocclusion tend to have a square jaw, skeletal
deep bite, and a short lower facial height. Class II division
II malocclusions demonstrate strong growth patterns in
which the upper molar grows down the facial axis, whereas
the upper incisor moves down with a retroclination. In this
case there is a diminution of space between the molar and
incisor. This results in a pinching or closing of the arch,
which gives the characteristic flaring of the upper lateral
incisors and linguoversion of the central incisors. In severe
cases an hourglass-shaped upper arch form may result.

CLASS III
In Class III malocclusion, the mesiobuccal cusp tip of the
maxillary first permanent molar is posterior to the buccal
groove of the mandibular first permanent molar (Fig. 2115). The most common cause of Class III malocclusions
is excessive growth of the mandible. The molar position
of these patients is referred to as mesio-occlusion, whereas
the anterior relationship shows a negative overjet. Many

Figure 21-13 Class II division I occlusion.

404

Chapter 21

n

Cephalometrics and Facial Aesthetics: The Key to Complete Treatment Planning

cases demonstrate dental compensations in which the
maxillary incisors are excessively flared and the mandibular incisors are severely tipped lingually. These patients
typically show concave facial profiles and steep mandibular plane angles attributable, in part, to an obtuse gonial
angle.

FACIAL TYPES

Figure 21-14 Class II division II occlusion.

The three basic facial types or patterns are dolichofacial
(vertical), mesofacial (ideal), and brachyfacial (horizontal). The determination of the patient’s facial pattern is
important in growth prediction and treatment planning,
even though no definitive correlation between malocclusion and facial types has been demonstrated. It should be
obvious that the prognosis for a pleasing facial result in
the treatment of a Class II malocclusion associated with
a retrognathic mandible would be more uncertain than
that in the treatment of a Class II malocclusion occurring
with an orthognathic mandible. Therefore one of the first
assessments necessary for an accurate craniofacial diagnosis is classification of the patient’s facial type.
Although all facial types may be observed in association with different malocclusions, a significantly higher
incidence of specific types does occur with certain types of
malocclusion, such as the association of Class II malocclusions with retrognathic mandibles and of Class III malocclusions with prognathic mandibles. On the other hand,
an orthognathic facial type is not always associated with an
ideal Class I occlusal relationship. As the clinician becomes
more familiar with the different types of malocclusion, it
will become obvious that certain facial patterns are commonly associated with each classification of malocclusion.

MESOFACIAL PATTERN
The mesofacial pattern is most often associated with Class
I occlusions because these patients are characterized by a
relatively normal maxillary and mandibular relationship
that results in good facial balance (Fig. 21-16).

DOLICHOFACIAL PATTERN
The faces of patients with the dolichofacial pattern are
usually long and of weak musculature because of the tendency for vertical growth. The molar occlusion is often of
the Class II division I variety. The protruded dentition of
these patients often results in facial grimacing and disharmony. Reduction of the interincisal angle will result in a
more pleasing facial profile (Fig. 21-17).

BRACHYFACIAL PATTERN

Figure 21-15 Class III occlusion.

The short faces and wide, square mandibles of patients
with a brachyfacial pattern are most often associated
with Class II division II malocclusions. The mandibular
growth of these patients is usually forward rather than
downward. Consequently, these patients typically exhibit
excessive anterior overbites and strong chins (Fig. 21-18).
Aesthetically, the brachyfacial patient can generally accommodate a fuller dentition with a more acute interincisal angle. The fuller dentition helps balance the strong
chin and the shorter lower facial height by giving more
forward projection to the midfacial region.

Chapter 21

n

Cephalometrics and Facial Aesthetics: The Key to Complete Treatment Planning

405

Figure 21-16 Mesofacial pattern.

Figure 21-18 Brachyfacial pattern.

VERTICAL ARCH DISCREPANCIES
OPEN BITE
Open-bite relationships are characterized by failure of
the teeth in both arches to meet properly (Fig. 21-19).
Open bites may be observed in the anterior or posterior region and may be attributable to supraeruption of
the adjacent teeth or infraeruption of the teeth in the
area of question. Open bites may be caused by abnormal
habits, deviant growth patterns, or an abnormal tongue
position.

DEEP BITE

Figure 21-17 Dolichofacial pattern.

Deep bites are most often observed in Class II division
I malocclusion in which, because of the excessive overjet, the mandibular incisors supraerupt until they come
into contact with the hard palate (Fig. 21-20). The Class
II division II malocclusion is also associated with a deep
bite, although in these patients the cause may be infraeruption of the posterior teeth or supraeruption of the
maxillary anterior teeth. In many deep-bite cases the condition results in overclosure of the mandible, leading to
labial movement of the upper incisors and, in some cases,
generalized spacing of the maxillary anterior teeth. The
correction leading to opening of the bite is determined
by the type of malocclusion, the aesthetic goals, and the
philosophical approach of the clinician. A comprehensive
case analysis is therefore necessary to define the etiologic
factors.

406

Chapter 21

n

Cephalometrics and Facial Aesthetics: The Key to Complete Treatment Planning

Figure 21-19 Open-bite pattern.

Figure 21-20 Deep-bite pattern.

ANGLE CLASSIFICATION OF OCCLUSION
Orthodontists are concerned with facial form, function,
oral health, and beauty. The primary criteria for classifying the occlusion were developed in 1899 by Edward

Angle, the father of modern orthodontics, to evaluate
the sagittal relationship of the canines and molars. Angle
was a nonextractionist who considered the bust of Apollo
Belvedere to be the epitome of facial balance, and consequently it served as a guide to his treatment objectives.
Angle contended that dental arch expansion was necessary for proper orthodontic treatment. With this method
of treatment, Dr. Angle rarely removed teeth. Insightful
orthodontists such as Charles Tweed, Hays Nance, and
P. R. Begg refuted Angle’s approach to treatment, which
often resulted in poor facial aesthetics, instability, and
periodontal problems. These latter orthodontists often
recommended the removal of teeth to improve facial aesthetics and avoid double protrusion. Over the years the
pendulum has swung back and forth between extraction
and nonextraction. The fear of creating a “dished-in” profile has been reported. The statement has been made that
the removal of premolars in orthodontic therapy will result in flat facial profiles and temporomandibular joint
dysfunction. A study carried out at Washington University evaluated 160 extraction cases. The study findings
indicate that, if proper diagnostic criteria are used in the
treatment evaluation, the removal of teeth is not detrimental to good facial balance. The Angle system of classification (described earlier) is a simple analysis that allows
one to classify a patient’s occlusion into one of three different categories (Class I, II, or III). Although this system
allows for ease of understanding and communication, it
should be augmented with further data to develop an appreciation of facial form. It has been the authors’ experience that better and more gratifying results are achieved
when the original diagnosis and treatment plan correlate
the sagittal, dental, and skeletal relationships with facial
form.
The Angle description of the sagittal relationship of
the maxillary and mandibular dental units does not
take into account their spatial orientation with respect to the patient’s facial type. For example, Figures
21-21 and 21-22 show examples of two patients who
both demonstrate Angle Class III malocclusion. From
the photographs it is apparent that the overall relationship of the bony bases and the teeth to the face are quite
dissimilar, even though both examples are given the
same Angle classification. Figure 21-21 depicts an example of maxillary deficiency (retrognathism), whereas
Figure 21-22 represents a case demonstrating mandibular prognathism. Even though the Angle relationship is
the same, the comprehensive diagnosis and treatment
plan should be quite different if the most favorable result for each patient is to be achieved. Therefore, further
supplementation of the Angle system of classification is
in order.

DESCRIPTIVE SKELETAL AND DENTAL
EVALUATION
Before the basic steps involved in comprehensive analysis
are outlined, five descriptive terms must be defined and
clearly understood. They are as follows:
Orthognathism. A skeletal term indicating the ideal balance among the cranial base, the maxilla, and the
mandible from a sagittal view.

Chapter 21

n

Cephalometrics and Facial Aesthetics: The Key to Complete Treatment Planning

407

B

A

C

Figure 21-21 A, Maxillary retrognathism (clinical appearance). B, Maxillary retrognathism (cephalometric radiograph).
C, Class III occlusion.

Prognathism. The anterior positioning of either one
or both bony jaws relative to the facial skeleton and soft
tissues. Hence the following entities may exist: maxillary
prognathism, mandibular prognathism, or bimaxillary
(maxillary and mandibular) prognathism.
Retrognathism. The posterior placement of either
one or both jaws relative to the face. Similar entities can
be demonstrated as mentioned in the previous category.
Protrusion. A forward positioning of the dental units
(teeth) relative to their bony base. Again, protrusion may
occur with maxillary or mandibular teeth or both.
Retrusion. A posterior placement of either one or
both dentoalveolar units relative to their respective bony
bases.
Although the terms prognathism and retrognathism
describe improper skeletal relationships of the jaws and
the face, protrusion and retrusion simply indicate the
relation of the dentoalveolar unit with respect to its supporting jaw.
Thus four components exist that can occur in any one
of three possible sagittal positions (anterior, posterior,
and ideal). These constitute 81 possible combinations.
By supplementing the Angle classification with additional analyses to determine the relative maxillary and
mandibular skeletal, dental, and facial relationships,

the clinician can obtain a more detailed diagnosis. The
specific components of the craniofacial complex responsible for the discrepancy are also more clearly identified. Cephalometric analysis also must be correlated and
compared with other diagnostic records and clinical
findings because the former cannot be expected to provide all the information necessary for an accurate treatment analysis.
The accuracy of the diagnosis is dependent on a
thorough and systematic evaluation of several of the
morphologic components in combination; individual
measurements are of little value by themselves. Isolated
measurements may demonstrate clinical deviation from
the norm, but when these dimensions are combined
with others, they may show collective compensation
yielding a normal occlusal relationship. In contrast, a
malocclusion may also be the result of dimensions that,
individually, are considered within normal limits yet in
combination result in an abnormal arrangement.
Any cephalometric measurement may be misleading.
There are no specific groups of factors that provide 100%
accuracy. It is important to realize that the fewer factors
used in the analysis, the greater the risk of misdiagnosis.
It is the borderline cases that often require a more detailed analysis. Obvious cases involving severe skeletal

408

Chapter 21

n

Cephalometrics and Facial Aesthetics: The Key to Complete Treatment Planning

B

A

C
Figure 21-22 A, Mandibular prognathism (clinical appearance). B, Mandibular prognathism (cephalometric radiograph).
C, Class III occlusion.

dysplasia can often be diagnosed based on relatively few
factors.
To properly analyze a cephalometric tracing, one
must evaluate the interarch and the patient’s facial
characteristics.

EVALUATION OF FACIAL AESTHETICS
A thorough and systematic evaluation of a patient’s facial
structures forms the basis for an accurate diagnosis and
subsequent treatment. Too often the lateral cephalometric radiograph and diagnostic casts are used as substitutes
for a complete clinical examination of the patient’s facial characteristics. Most of us have been taught to focus
on the lateral cephalometric radiograph in our diagnosis.

In the process, we have migrated away from the clinical
examination and the art of the soft-tissue diagnosis. It
is imperative that we reintroduce the fundamental concepts of art and beauty that were fundamental in Angle
School of Orthodontia. Over the years, advancements in
orthodontic technology have resulted in a shift from the
art in orthodontic diagnosis and treatment planning to a
dependency on cephalometric measurements. The clinical examination has taken a back seat to the typical orthodontic records, which include the lateral cephalometric
radiograph and study models. Orthodontic treatment
goals based entirely on cephalometric numbers may result
in excessive retraction of the maxillary and mandibular
incisors. There is much more to modern-day orthodontics than just an excellent occlusion. It has been stated

Chapter 21

n

Cephalometrics and Facial Aesthetics: The Key to Complete Treatment Planning

Figure 21-23 Patient’s head positioned with the Frankfort

horizontal plane parallel to the floor.

that hard-tissue analysis alone is inadequate in treatment
planning and may result in a compromised soft-tissue
profile. Lines, angles, and numbers should not be used as
the only diagnostic tools, but rather should be viewed as
an adjunct to what the clinician visually assesses about
the patient’s facial form. To develop the clinical ability to
observe variations from the normal facial structure, the
practitioner must have a firm grasp of what constitutes an
ideal face (complete with ideal variations). This section
deals with the facial examination of the ideal face. The
guidelines are directed at the adolescent and teenaged patient and do not have complete application to patients
from 5 to 10 years of age, because facial proportions generally change with the approach of puberty.
To evaluate the patient properly, the clinician should
have the patient stand in a relaxed position. The patient’s
head should be positioned with the Frankfort horizontal
plane parallel to the floor (Fig. 21-23). Patients should not
be asked to simply “look straight ahead,” because patients
tend to place the head in the position that is habitually
preferred. It is also important to position the patient’s occlusion in centric relation rather than centric occlusion.
The patient’s lips should be in repose during the examination. Patients frequently mask lip incompetence by forcing their lips together.

FRONTAL VIEW
The evaluation begins with the frontal view. This is the
view people most often see of themselves. The balance
among the upper, middle, and lower thirds of the face

409

Figure 21-24 Frontal facial thirds.

is analyzed (Fig. 21-24). The upper third is bounded by
the hairline (when combed back) and glabellar area. This
area is least informative and is not the area to which corrections would normally be directed. More emphasis is
placed on the proportions and symmetry of the middle
third (from the glabellar region to subnasale) and the lower third (from the subnasale to menton).
In the middle third of the face, when the patient is
looking straight ahead, the sclera of the eye is not seen
superior or inferior to the pupil. Normal intercanthal distance is 30 to 32 mm (CD, ± 2 mm). Normal interpupillary distance is 60 to 65 mm. The inner and outer canthal tendons should fall close to a straight horizontal axis
through the palpebral fissures (the fissures created when
the eyelids are closed). The distance between the semilunar folds in the intercanthal area should approximate the
alar base width (Fig. 21-25). Deviations from these general
guidelines could indicate some deformity of the middle
facial third.
Evaluation of the lower facial third is then carried out.
The ratio of the middle to lower facial thirds in vertical
height should be approximately 5:6. The upper lip and its
relationship to the teeth are noted with the lips in repose
and also during smiling. The distance between the medial
limbus of the eyes should equal the width of the mouth
when it is relaxed (Fig. 21-26). Interlabial distance is measured with the lips at rest; up to 3.5 mm of interlabial distance is considered acceptable. The upper lip length from
subnasale to stomion (lip commissure) should represent
one third of the lower third facial height (see Fig. 21-24).
Normal upper lip length should be 22 mm (CD, ± 2 mm)

410

Chapter 21

n

Cephalometrics and Facial Aesthetics: The Key to Complete Treatment Planning

Figure 21-25 Comparison of the intercanthal distance

and alar base width.

Figure 21-26 Comparison of the medial limbus width
and the width of the mouth.

Figure 21-27 Ideal smile pattern.

in males and 20 mm (CD, ± 2 mm) in females. Ideally,
with the lips in repose, 2 to 4 mm of the upper incisor
should be visible. More than this amount could indicate
a vertical maxillary excess. One important characteristic
that is often missed is that the incisal edges should approximate the lower lip line.
Next, the patient’s smile is assessed. Another important
aspect of a well-balanced smile is the height, uniformity,
and contour of the gingival margins. Grafts and gingival
recontouring may be an important treatment modality in
selected cases. In addition, the facial surfaces of the anterior teeth should converge toward the facial midline; the
long axis (direction of the anterior teeth) in an aesthetic
smile also follows a progression as the teeth move away
from the midline. The separations between the maxillary anterior teeth help to define an attractive smile. The
spaces between the edges of the teeth are known as embrasure spaces. These spaces follow a pattern that begins
between the central incisors and progresses as one moves
away from the dental midline. Smile patterns vary with
individuals, but aesthetically, when a person smiles, the
upper lip vermilion should rest on or near the cervicogingival margin of the incisors (Fig. 21-27).
The smile analysis would not be complete without
an evaluation of the buccal corridors, which are defined
as the spaces between the buccal surfaces of the maxillary posterior teeth and the inner commisures (see Fig.
21-27). Generally, smile attractiveness is improved as
the buccal corridor is decreased. In other words, small

Chapter 21

n

Cephalometrics and Facial Aesthetics: The Key to Complete Treatment Planning

Figure 21-28 Excessive eversion of the lower lip.

Figure 21-29 Hyperactive mentalis muscle during
forced lip closure. Patient has lip incompetence.

­ uccal c­ orridors are considered to be significantly more
b
attractive than large buccal corridors. The position of the
lower lip is also noted. Excessive eversion of the lower
lip is seen in patients with mandibular retrognathism
(Fig. 21-28). The mentalis muscle can be hyperactive
during forced closure of the lower lip (Fig. 21-29); such
muscle hyperactivity is frequently seen in patients with
mandibular retrognathia, vertical maxillary excess, apertognathia (open-bite deformity), and lip incompetence.
The last evaluation of the full face is that of facial symmetry. The face is divided in half by a line that bisects the
glabella, nasal tip, upper lip, and chin (Fig. 21-30). The
face is also divided vertically into equal fifths (Fig. 21-31).

PROFILE VIEW
The patient is next evaluated from the profile view. The
examination considers many of the same features noted
in the frontal examination. The face is divided into thirds
(Fig. 21-32). A comparison of the vertical facial heights
and the AP relationship of the facial thirds constitutes the
initial assessment. The vertical relationships are the same
in the profile view as they are in frontal views.
The upper facial third profile establishes the relationship between the forehead and superior orbital rim. The
further the forehead protrudes beyond the superior orbital rim, the less aesthetically acceptable it is. The globe of
the eye and its relationship to the superior orbital rim are
assessed. The superior orbital rim is normally 8 to 16 mm
anterior of the globe.

Figure 21-30 Facial symmetry.

411

412

Chapter 21

n

Cephalometrics and Facial Aesthetics: The Key to Complete Treatment Planning

Figure 21-33 Ratio shows 1:1 relationship from nasolabial fold to subnasale, and from subnasale to tip
of the nose.
Figure 21-31 Vertical facial fifths.

Figure 21-32 Profile facial thirds.

The evaluation of the middle facial third involves an
assessment of the relationship among the globes, inferior
orbital rims, cheekbones, nose, and upper lip. The nasal
bridge should project anterior to the globe by 5 to 15 mm.
A reference line dropped from the most anterior projection of the globe and perpendicular to the Frankfort horizontal plane should fall on, or slightly behind, the soft
tissue of the cheek.
In evaluation of the lower facial third, the vertical dimensions as described in the frontal view need to be considered. In addition, AP assessments are done. Projection
of the upper lip is clinically evaluated by measuring from
the nasolabial fold to the subnasale and comparing that
numeric value with the distance from the subnasale to
the tip of the nose. Ideally this ratio should be 1:1 (Fig.
21-33). The relationship of the nose and upper lip is determined by measuring the nasolabial angle (Fig. 21-34).
This value can range from 90° to 110°.
The lower facial third is compared with the middle
and upper thirds. The zero meridian is a straight line constructed by placing a line through the soft-tissue nasion,
perpendicular to the Frankfort horizontal plane. The lips
and chin should fall near this line (Fig. 21-35). During the
profile evaluation of the lower facial third, any AP discrepancies between the maxilla and mandible (i.e., prognathism and retrognathism) are noted. The upper and
lower lip positions are also assessed. The shape and size
of the chin button are appraised. In some cases apparent
mandibular retrognathism is in reality a flat or deficient
chin button (microgenia). Conversely, too prominent a

Chapter 21

n

Figure 21-34 Nasolabial angle.

Cephalometrics and Facial Aesthetics: The Key to Complete Treatment Planning

Figure 21-35 Zero meridian.

Figure 21-36 Summary of lateral dentofacial measurements.

413

414

Chapter 21

n

Cephalometrics and Facial Aesthetics: The Key to Complete Treatment Planning

chin may be visualized as a pseudoprognathism and may
be aesthetically unacceptable.
The evaluation of the patient’s face constitutes an important portion of the initial diagnosis and treatment
plan phase of orthodontics. A systematic approach to examining the face is essential (Fig. 21-36). Basic guidelines
of facial form have been reviewed. The values discussed
are normal values for whites, but these must be used as
relative guidelines only. The clinician must look at the
patient’s face and assess the overall harmony that exists.
When deviations from normal facial form are detected,
variations in treatment modalities must be considered to
achieve better facial harmony. The main treatment objective is always to provide the patient with the best functional and aesthetic result possible.

SUGGESTED READINGS
Ackerman MB, Ackerman J: Smile analysis and design in the
digital era, J Clin Orthod 36:221–236, 2002.
Angle EH: Classification of malocclusion, Dent Cosmos 41:248-264,
350–357, 1899.
Arnett GW: Facial keys to diagnosis and treatment planning—
part I, Am J Orthod Dentofacial Orthop 103:299–312, 1993.
Arnett GW: Facial keys to diagnosis and treatment planning—
part II, Am J Orthod Dentofacial Orthop 103:395–411, 1993.
Baek GW, et al.: Skeletodental factors affecting chin point deviation in female patients with Class III malocclusion and facial
asymmetry: a three-dimensional analysis using computed
tomography, Oral Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol Oral Radiol Endod
104:628–639, 2007.
Bell WH, Proffit WR, White RP: Surgical correction of dentofacial
deformities, vol 1, Philadelphia, 1980, WB Saunders.
Boley JC: Serial extraction revisited: 30 years in retrospect,
Am J Orthod Dentofacial Orthop 112:575–577, 2002.
Braun S: Diagnosis driven vs appliance driven treatment
outcomes. In Sachdeva RCL, editor: Orthodontics for the next
millennium, Glendora, CA, 1997, Ormco, pp 32–45.
Broadbent BH: A new x-ray technique and its application to
orthodontia, Angle Orthod 1:45–66, 1931.
Broadbent BH: The face of the normal child, Angle Orthod
7:183–208, 1937.
Brodie AG, et al.: Cephalometric appraisal of orthodontic results:
a preliminary report, Angle Orthod 8:261–351, 1938.
Burstone CJ: Lip posture and its significance in treatment planning, Am J Orthod 53:262–284, 1967.
Cheong YV, Lo LJ: Facial asymmetry: etiology, evaluation, and
management, Chang Gung Med J 34:341–351, 2011.
Dickens S, Sarver DM, Proffit WR: The dynamics of the maxillary
incisor and the upper lip: a cross-sectional study of resting
and smile hard tissue characteristics, World J Orthod 3:313–
320, 2003.
Downs WB: Variations in facial relationships: their significance
in treatment and prognosis, Am J Orthod 34:812–840, 1948.
Dugoni SA, et al.: Early mixed dentition treatment: posttreatment
evaluation of stability and relapse, Angle Orthod 65:311–332,
1995.
Gracco A, et al.: The smile buccal corridors: aesthetic value for
dentists and laypersons, Prog Orthod 7:56–65, 2006.
Havens DC, et al.: The role of the posed smile in overall facial
esthetics, Angle Orthod 80:322–328, 2010.

James RD: A comparative study of facial profiles in extraction
and nonextraction treatment, Am J Orthod Dentofacial Orthop
114:265–276, 1998.
Katz MI: Angle classification revisited. Is current use reliable?
Am J Orthod Dentofacial Orthop 102:173–179, 1992.
Klocke A, Nanda RS, Kahl-Nieke B: Skeletal class II patterns
in the primary dentition, Am J Orthod Dentofacial Orthop
112:596–601, 2002.
Lines PA, Lines RR, Lines CA: Profilemetrics and facial esthetics,
Am J Orthod 73:648–657, 1978.
Long RE, McNamara JA: Facial growth following pharyngeal flap
surgery: skeletal assessment on serial lateral cephalometric
radiographs, Am J Orthod 87:187–196, 1985.
McLeod C, et al.: Esthetics and smile characteristics evaluated
by lay-person, Angle Orthod 81:198–205, 2011.
McNamara JA: Influence of respiratory pattern on craniofacial
growth, Angle Orthod 51:269–300, 1981.
Moore T, et al.: Buccal corridors and smile esthetics, Am J Orthod
Dentofacial Orthop 127:208–213, 2005.
Morley J: The role of cosmetic dentistry in restoring a youthful
appearance, J Am Dent Assoc 30:1166–1172, 1999.
Owen AH 3rd: Diagnostic block cephalometrics, part 1, J Clin
Orthod 18:400–422, 1984.
Owen AH 3rd: Clinical interpretation of diagnostic block cephalometric analysis, J Clin Orthod 20:710–715, 1986.
Parekh SM, et al.: Attractiveness of variations in the smile arc
and buccal corridor space as judged by orthodontists and
laymen, Angle Orthod 76:557, 2006.
Reidel RA: The relation of maxillary structures to cranium
in malocclusion and in normal occlusion, Angle Orthod
22:142–145, 1952.
Ricketts RM: Cephalometric analysis and synthesis, Angle Orthod
31:141–156, 1961.
Ricketts RM, Schulhof RJ, Bagha L: Orientation—sella-nasion or
Frankfort horizontal, Am J Orthod 69:648–654, 1976.
Ritter DE, et al.: Analysis of the smile photograph, World J Orthod
7:279–285, 2006.
Rody WJ Jr, Araujo EA: Extraction decision-making Wigglegram,
J Clin Orthod 36:510–519, 2002.
Sarver DM: Video cephalometric diagnosis (VCD): a new concept in treatment planning? Am J Orthod Dentofacial Orthop
110:128–136, 1996.
Schulhof RJ: When S-N is abnormal, J Clin Orthod 11:343, 1977.
Severt TR, Proffit WR: The prevalence of facial asymmetry in
the dentofacial deformities population at the University of
North Carolina, Int J Adult Orthod Orthognath Surg 12:171–176,
1997.
Simon PW: Fundamental principles of a systematic diagnosis of
dental anomalies, Boston, 1926, The Stratford.
Steiner C: Cephalometrics for you and me, Am J Orthod
39:729–755, 1953.
Tucker S, et al.: Comparison of actual surgical outcomes and
3-dimensional surgical simulations, J Oral Maxillofac Surg
68:2412–2421, 2010.
Tweed CH: The Frankfort-mandibular incisor angle (FMIA) in
orthodontic diagnosis, treatment planning and prognosis,
Angle Orthod 24:121–169, 1954.
You KH et al.: Three-dimensional computed tomography analysis of mandibular morphology in patients with facial asymmetry and mandibular prognathism, Am J Orthod Dentofacial
Orthop 138:540.e1–8, 2010.

CHAPTER

22

Managing the Developing
Occlusion
s Jeffrey A. Dean

For additional resources, please visit the

website.

CHAPTER OUTLINE
DEVELOPMENT OF OCCLUSION
AND TIMING OF INTERVENTIONS
Primate Spaces
Mesial Molar Shift
Leeway Space
Intervention Considerations
EARLY LOSS OF TEETH AND SPACE
MAINTENANCE
Needs Assessment
Specific Tooth Loss Strategies
ORAL HABITS IN CHILDREN
Bruxism
Digit Sucking
Tongue-Thrust Swallowing
ANTERIOR CROSSBITE IN PRIMARY
AND MIXED DENTITIONS
Tongue Blade/Popsicle Stick Therapy
Lower Inclined Plane

Palatal-Spring Appliances
(Removable Hawley or Fixed
Palatal Wire)
Fixed Transpalatal Wires with
Springs
POSTERIOR CROSSBITE IN PRIMARY
AND MIXED DENTITIONS
Selective Equilibration
Maxillary Expansion
ERUPTION PROBLEMS AND
ERUPTION “GUIDANCE”
Ectopic Eruption of First Permanent
Molars
Eruption Guidance in the Lower
Incisor Segment
Eruption Guidance in the
Mandibular Canine and Premolar
Segment

I

t should be the goal of every practitioner providing
oral health care for children and adolescents to assess
and guide the developing occlusion toward optimal
outcomes. The Clinical Guidelines of the American Academy of Pediatric Dentistry1 on “Management of the Developing Dentition and Occlusion in Pediatric Dentistry”
illustrate this responsibility with the following statement:
Guidance of eruption and development of the primary, mixed and permanent dentitions is an integral component of comprehensive oral healthcare
for all pediatric dental patients. Such guidance
should contribute to the development of a permanent dentition that is in a stable, functional, and esthetically acceptable occlusion. Early diagnosis and
successful treatment of developing malocclusions
can have both short-term and long-term benefits
while achieving the goal of occlusal harmony, function, and dental facial esthetics.
Ngan and colleagues2 illustrate this responsibility regarding contemporary practice in stating, “Pediatric d
­ entistry
has increasingly shifted from a conservative-restorative
approach toward a concept of total pediatric patient care.
Thus all aspects of oral health care including diagnosis,
prevention, oral medicine, restoration, and correction of
malocclusion are increasingly the responsibility of the

Eruption Guidance in the Maxillary
Canine and Premolar Segment
OBSTRUCTIVE SLEEP APNEA AND
ORTHODONTICS
COMPREHENSIVE ORTHODONTICS
FOR THE DEVELOPING
OCCLUSION
Primary to Mid-Mixed Dentition
(Ages 4 to 10 Years)
Mid- to Late Mixed Dentition (Ages
10 to 12 Years)
Early Permanent Dentition (Ages 12
to 16 Years)

pediatric dentist.” In the context of these statements, clinical decisions are presented daily that challenge pediatric
practitioners in affecting outcomes in management of the
developing occlusion. As defined by Moyers,3 space supervision is “when the judgment of the dentist determines
that the individual patient’s occlusion will have a better
chance of obtaining optimum development through supervised intervention of the transitional dentition than
without clinician directed intervention.” Space supervision encompasses procedures such as preventive orthodontics, guidance of eruption, interceptive orthodontics,
and phased “early” orthodontic treatment that should be
understood in terms of its diagnostic parameters, treatment basis, and clinical applications.

DEVELOPMENT OF OCCLUSION
AND TIMING OF INTERVENTIONS
PRIMATE SPACES
A review of studies by Baume,4 Moorrees,5,6 Bishara and
colleagues,7 and Moyers and Wainwright8 provides an
understanding of the biogenetic course of the primary,
transitional, and permanent dentitions that is critical
to management of the developing dentition. Evaluating
study models of the primary dentitions of 30 children
415

416

Chapter 22

n

Managing the Developing Occlusion

obtained sequentially at various developmental stages,
Baume4 reported two consistent morphologic arch forms
of the primary dentition: either generalized spaces between the teeth were present (type I) or the teeth were
in proximal contact without spacing (type II). The arch
form in both types appears congenital rather than developmental because the original pattern exhibited upon
eruption was maintained from ages 3 to 6 years. Spaced
arches frequently exhibit two distinct diastemas—referred
to as primate spaces—one between the mandibular canine
and first primary molar and the other between the maxillary lateral incisor and primary canine. Baume4 observed
that until the eruption of the permanent first molars, the
sagittal dimension of the primary dental arches remained
essentially unchanged, with the possible exception of a
slight decrease as the result of the development of dental
caries on the proximal surfaces of the molar teeth. Only
minor changes in the transverse dimension of the primary dental arches occurred during 3 to 6 years of age unless
negatively influenced by deleterious functional patterns.
Given these findings, orthodontic intervention during
the primary dentition up to 6 years of age is mostly directed toward maintaining inherent arch dimensions and
arch integrity with preventive and restorative services.
Space maintainers, when primary teeth are lost prematurely, are the next major consideration in maintaining
arch dimensions. Control of functional problems such as
elimination of deleterious thumb-sucking habits and correction of functional crossbites may also receive attention
during the primary dentition years. While desirable, treatments for these factors are often deferred depending upon
the cooperation of the child with appliance protocols.

A

B

MESIAL MOLAR SHIFT
The early-mixed dentition (6 to 9 years of age) is a period
much more prone to localized factors that may result in
severe malocclusion problems if undetected. In addition to
a continuation of basic preventive and space maintenance
issues, problems encountered in this period include dentoalveolar anterior crossbites, ectopic eruption of permanent
incisors and/or first permanent molars, posterior crossbites, open bite and flared maxillary incisors associated
with deleterious oral habits, and developmental anomalies
(e.g., ankylosis, supernumerary teeth, and missing teeth).
Baume4 compared models of 60 children before and after
eruption of the permanent molars and found three distinct kinds of molar adjustment (Fig. 22-1). “Early” mesial
shift during first permanent molar eruption occurs at the
expense of any posterior spacing that might have been
present to include breakdown spaces resulting from interproximal caries. Moyers,8 agreeing that the pattern of
transition involving the straight terminal plane is normal,
suggested that the occlusion forming a mesial step (distal
surface of the lower second primary molar is mesial to the
same surface of the maxillary molar) is most ideal for Class
I development. A distal step (distal surface of lower second
primary molar is distal to the same surface of the maxillary
molar) indicates a developing Class II malocclusion. Proper
permanent molar occlusion was achieved from a straight
terminal plane by a second mesial shift of the molars as
second primary molars are exfoliated. This “late” shift of

C
Figure 22-1 A, Diagram showing mesial step terminal plane

that allows the first permanent molar to erupt directly into
proper Class I occlusion. B, Straight terminal plane with
primary spacing. “Early mesial shift” of mandibular molars
closing primary spaces will help establish proper first permanent molar occlusion. C, Straight terminal plane without
primary spacing. Permanent molars erupt into end-on position in the mixed dentition. Proper first permanent molar
occlusion may be attained when the second primary molars
exfoliate and a “late mesial shift” of the mandibular first
permanent molar occurs.

the mandibular first molar, often under the additional influence of the emerging second permanent molar, occurs
at the expense of the leeway space with a decrease in attendant arch length of 2 to 3 mm on average.
Further evaluation by Baume indicated that a transverse widening of the intercanine width of the upper
and lower dental arches occurred during eruption of the
permanent incisors. The increase represented a physiologic widening by lateral and frontal alveolar growth

Chapter 22

to provide space for the erupting permanent incisors
and their greater mesiodistal widths. The mean increase
in intercanine width was greater in the maxillary arch
(3 to 4 mm) than in the mandibular arch (2 to 3 mm).
In the mandibular arch, the greatest tendency to increased
width was during eruption of the lower lateral incisors,
whereas in the maxillary arch it occurred primarily during
eruption of the maxillary central incisors. Whereas the
increase was slightly greater in nonspaced primary arches
than in spaced arches, the arches with spaces generally resulted in favorable alignment of the permanent incisors.
About 40% of the arches without primary dental spacing
resulted in crowded anterior segments. Moorrees reported similar dimensional changes concurrent with incisor
transitional periods.5
Bishara and colleagues7 also reported arch dimensional
changes in their studies of patients from 6 weeks to 45 years
of age, noting that (1) significant maxillary and mandibular arch width increases occurred between 6 weeks and 2
years of age; (2) the mandibular intercanine width was established by 8 years of age (i.e., after eruption of the four
incisors); and (3) although arch width increased between
3 and 13 years of age, there was a slight decrease in width,
more in the intercanine than in the intermolar area, after
complete eruption of the permanent teeth. In sum, incisor
alignment patterns and intercanine arch dimensions are
essentially established by age 8 years of age. Interceptive
procedures receive significantly more emphasis in this period to allow for a harmonious transition directed toward
achieving alignment of the permanent incisors and 6-year
molars with symmetric arch development and coincident
midlines. Additionally, early recognition and elimination
of deleterious oral habits or deviant functional patterns
should enhance normal patterns of development while
­diminishing the long-term effects of atypical growth.

LEEWAY SPACE
In addition to malocclusion factors identifiable during
first molar and incisor transition, corrective measures to
align and position the erupting buccal segments come
into play during the late mixed dentition (9 to 12 years
of age), when primary canines and molars are exfoliating
in conjunction with eruption of the permanent canines
and premolars. Epidemiologic studies demonstrate that
crowding and malalignment become significantly more
prevalent and exhibit greater severity between the mixeddentition period (6 to 12 years of age) and the adolescent
young permanent dentition (12 to 18 years of age). This
suggests that normal transitional changes do not compensate for anterior malalignment and crowding, in that
late mesial shift of the buccal segments upon exfoliation
of second primary molars results in decreased arch length
and arch circumference. Nance9 observed that in the average patient’s mandibular arch, a leeway size difference
of +1.7 mm per side exists, with the combined mesiodistal widths of the primary canine, first primary molar, and
second primary molar being larger than the mesiodistal
widths of the corresponding permanent canine and premolars. The difference between the total width of the
corresponding three primary teeth in the maxillary arch
compared with the three permanent teeth that succeed

n

Managing the Developing Occlusion

417

them is +0.9 mm per side of leeway space. The control of
this leeway space in terms of arch dimensional change
through space supervision may offer opportunities for significant improvement in tooth size–arch size adjustments
for the relief of typical levels of crowding. Gianelly10,11
and others have shown that the control of leeway space
will accommodate typical levels of lower incisor crowding in approximately 75% of mixed-dentition patients
presenting for orthodontic treatment. As applied to the
late mixed dentition, a positive excess leeway space to an
overall deficiency of less than 2 mm per quadrant may
be considered potential situations for space supervision
programs. Lower arch length deficiencies of more than 2
to 3 mm per quadrant should be considered a discrepancy
beyond simple guidance procedures. However, there is a
drawback: Sonis and Ackerman have shown a significant
increase in mandibular second permanent molar impaction with this approach when compared with historic
controls.12 There is a positive predictive value in measurement of the pretreatment intermolar angulation between
the first and second permanent mandibular molars.
In keeping with supervision of leeway space as a fundamental concept, the vast majority of patients should
be evaluated around the time of the clinical emergence
of the lower canine, lower first premolars, and upper first
premolars. These teeth erupt about 1 to 1½ years ahead
of the final buccal segment transition. This leaves time
for the practitioner to assess overall dimensional needs
and plan treatment interventions for the relief of crowding, manage space to minimize future permanent tooth
extractions, coordinate the transverse widths of the dental arches, and guide teeth into favorable positions that
provide more stable long-term results. A second advantage for this timing in diagnosis and treatment planning
is that it precedes the pubertal growth spurt in females,
which in turn is approximately 2 years ahead of the pubertal growth spurt in males. If a skeletal malocclusion
is noted, the opportunity for growth modification with
dentofacial orthopedics, to take advantage of peak growth
velocities, is available for positively influencing skeletal
discrepancies, arch development, and facial balance.
Consultation with an orthodontist is critical for children
in whom skeletal considerations, severe growth problems,
extensive crowding with pronounced tooth mass–arch
length discrepancies, and dental anomalies are present
that significantly compromise the child’s orofacial development. Coordination will lead to more accurate identification of problems, aid in appropriate treatment decisions, and offer the potential for optimal results without
having to resort to compromised treatment options in the
full permanent dentition. Psychological aspects of treatment in terms of patient motivation, improved and dramatic dentofacial change, a social desire for treatment,
and generally cooperative age group result in improved
well-being for the child and parents are good practicebuilders with timely coordinated management.

INTERVENTION CONSIDERATIONS
One should recognize that certain disadvantages involved
in “early” treatment must be factored into the equation on
whether to intervene in an individual patient. These include

418

Chapter 22

n

Managing the Developing Occlusion

the reality that overall treatment time is likely prolonged,
multiple problems often arise in individual patients, untoward responses may occur given the variability of growth
dynamics, there is potential for iatrogenic damage to the developing teeth, some children cannot cope with treatment
demands, and patient and parent burnout often occur given
that overall management is rarely a one-shot operation. Parents must have realistic perspectives of treatment goals and
be willing to assume the financial and appointment obligations involved in treatment. While things happen slowly
during the development of the occlusion, timing is critical
for certain procedures, in that there are many problems that
can occur and jeopardize successful outcome. In the decision-making process for an individual patient, the clinician
involved in early orthodontic procedures should ask two
key
questions, each with its own subset of questions:
  
1.	What is the specific problem? How did it happen? Is the
etiology resolved? What will happen without treatment? Will it stay the same, get worse, or go away on
its own? Simply put, not every child can or should be
treated with interceptive procedures. Roughly half of
patients fall into an area of real or absolute need in requiring corrective treatment for functional and aesthetic problems that will potentially lead to deterioration of
the occlusion if untreated. Even though some children
may benefit from interceptive treatments, there should
be understanding that later comprehensive treatments
will be necessary to achieve acceptable results.
2.	What will the likely result of interceptive treatment be?
The remaining estimate of up to 50% of children is
the population group that might benefit from early
orthodontic interventions in the developing occlusion years. This group involves malocclusion factors
in which treatment intervention will potentially
eliminate or minimize the need for future orthodontic
treatment. At the least, interceptive treatments should
enhance long-term treatment options and outcomes
without compromising future needs. So a subset of
questions should be asked. Is treatment justified in
terms of improvement in aesthetics and function while
eliminating or minimizing the need for future treatment? Will the intervention correct a problem at the
optimal time to enhance later options and outcomes?
Can treatment methods be used to advantage such
that the skill and experience of the clinician intersect
with patient needs? Does treatment meet socioeconomic issues? Does the treatment present an outcome
that can be easily realized in conjunction with later
comprehensive care that will be required anyway?
  
For these questions to be answered, a thorough clinical examination supported by appropriate diagnostic
records should be obtained before treatment interventions are initiated. The clinical examination should assess the patient’s overall health status, extraoral facial
patterns (profile, facial symmetry, area of discrepancy),
occlusion from an aesthetic and functional standpoint,
temporomandibular joint function, neuromuscular patterns, growth patterns, and nasopharyngeal airway patterns. A form similar to the one depicted in Figure 22-2
is helpful in composing clinical findings and formulating
the patient’s diagnosis, problem list, and treatment plan

s­ ummary. In terms of diagnostic records beyond clinical
findings, necessary records may range from simple photos
or study models for the treatment of a functional posterior crossbite to a complete set of orthodontic records for
a patient with a skeletal malocclusion or severe crowding.
More comprehensive records may include an eight-film
series of extraoral and intraoral photographs, appropriately trimmed orthodontic study models, a full-mouth series or panoramic radiographs, lateral and anteroposterior
cephalograms, and, when indicated, temporomandibular
diagnostic views such as corrected axis tomograms or
magnetic resonance imaging. Supplemental diagnostic
procedures can also include a detailed tooth size–arch size
space analysis (Chapter 19) and a cephalometric analysis
(Chapter 20). Finally, cone-beam computed tomography
should be considered in special cases, such as patients
with impacted teeth or craniofacial anomalies.

EARLY LOSS OF TEETH AND SPACE
MAINTENANCE
If arch integrity is disrupted by early loss of primary teeth,
problems may arise that affect the alignment of the permanent dentition. Opposing teeth can supraerupt, more distal
teeth can drift and tip mesially, and more forward teeth can
drift and tip distally (Figs. 22-3 and 22-4). Altered tooth positions may include a “symptomatic” space deficiency with
loss of arch length and circumference, blocked or deflected
eruption of permanent teeth, unattractive appearance, food
impaction areas, increased caries and periodontal disease,
and other negative aspects of malocclusion. The altered
occlusal relationships may evidence traumatic interference and untoward jaw relationships. When early primary
tooth loss occurs, corrective measures such as passive space
maintenance, active tooth guidance with space regained,
or a combination of both may be needed to optimize the
normal process of occlusal development.
Miyamoto and colleagues13 observed the effects of the
early loss of primary teeth by measuring crowding and
malalignment in the permanent dentition of 255 schoolchildren aged 11 years or older. Children who had premature loss of one or more primary canines or molars
were more likely to receive orthodontic treatment in the
permanent dentition, with the need being more than 3
times greater in children who had lost one or more primary teeth through 9 years of age than in the control group.
Premature loss of primary molars was especially associated with major malalignment of permanent teeth. No differences were observed in effects between loss of first and
second primary molars. Crowding of anterior teeth was
directly affected by the premature loss of primary canines.

NEEDS ASSESSMENT
Owen’s review of the clinical literature14 revealed the following general factors that should be considered in assessing the implications of premature loss of primary teeth
for arch development, the development of a malocclusion,
  and the need for a space maintainer.
1.	Incidence of space loss. Almost all cases of early primary molar loss show some decrease in arch length
(i.e., m
­ esial movement of permanent molars, distal

Chapter 22

n

Managing the Developing Occlusion

419

ORTHODONTIC DIAGNOSIS, TREATMENT, AND MECHANICS PLAN

Name

Race

Sex

Birthdate

Resident’s Name:

Age

Chart No.

Records Date:

1. Patient History
A. Significant Medical History:
B. Patient’s and/or Parents’ Chief Complaint:
C. Attitude Toward Treatment:
2. Clinical Examination
A. Soft Tissue
Profile
Oral Hygiene
B. Occlusion Class:
I
Overjet
mm
Crossbite
Molar Relation: Left
Cuspid Relation: Left

Lip Competence
Periodontal Status
II

III
Overbite

Lip/Incisor at Rest
Other
mm

Smiling

Division:
I
Midline

II
mm

Right
Right

C. Dental Development Stage and Eruption Sequence:

D. Habits and/or Other Significant Clinical Findings:

E. TMJ and Function:
Normal Deviated:
Opening Path:
Normal Deviated:
Closing Path:
Vertical
mm
Range of Motion:
Left Deviation:
mm
Left
Joint Sounds: None
Opening
Closing
Crepitus
None
Muscle Tenderness:
Normal
Tongue Function:

Protrusion:
Right Deviation:
Right

mm
mm

3. Model Analysis
Static Tanaka and Johnston Analysis (JADA 1974)
Total M-D Width of Lower Incisors
Total M-D Width of Upper Incisors
mm “A”

A

Maxillary Arch Length Discrepancy (From 6 to 6)
Total Predicted Tooth Mass:
mm
[(“B”  2)  11 mm]  2  “A” 
mm
Total Measured Arch Length

mm
Difference

mm “B”

Mandibular Arch Length Discrepancy (From 6 to 6)
Total Predicted Tooth Mass:
mm
[(“B”  2)  10.5 mm]  2  “B” 
mm
Total Measured Arch Length

mm
Difference

Figure 22-2 “Orthodontic Diagnosis and Treatment Plan” form. A, Front side.

continued

420

Chapter 22

n

Managing the Developing Occlusion

4. Attach computerized cephalometric tracing and appropriate analysis.

5. Diagnostic and Arch Length Analysis Summary and Problem List

6. Treatment Plan or Objective Sequence

7. Mechanics Plan–Appliance Selection—Retention

8. Projected Treatment Time (with Good Compliance), Treatment Fees

9. Faculty Authorization to Start Treatment:

Signature

Date

B
Figure 22-2, cont’d B, Back side. Indiana University Department of Pediatric Dentistry.

Chapter 22

n

Managing the Developing Occlusion

421

A
A

B

B
Figure 22-4 Loss of upper primary molars in association

with eruption of first permanent molars and space loss.
A, Loss of upper left first primary molar with space loss
approximating 4 to 6 mm. B, Loss of upper left second
primary molar with space loss approximating 6 to 8 mm.
Note rotation of first molar in conjunction with more bodily
movement.

C
Figure 22-3 A, Space loss and occlusal changes associated

with early loss of lower primary molars. B, Radiograph of
left segment with loss of first primary molar. Note some
distal movement of primary canine. C, Radiograph of right
segment with loss of mandibular second primary molar
and associated space loss approximating 4 to 6 mm. Note
pronounced mesial tipping of permanent first molar crown
without notable bodily movement.
movement of anterior teeth). The amount of closure is
affected by numerous variables (e.g., tooth involved,
time of loss).
2.	Time elapsed since loss. Most of the space loss usually
takes place during the first 6 months after the primary

tooth is lost, and space closure tends to occur more
rapidly in the maxillary arch than in the mandible.
Thus when a primary tooth is removed and factors indicate need for space maintenance, it is best to insert
an appliance as soon as possible after the extraction.
3.	Stage of development/dental age of the patient. In general,
more space loss is likely to occur if teeth are actively
erupting adjacent to the area left by the premature
loss of the primary tooth. Significant space loss is
most influenced by the stage of eruption of the first
permanent molars, with the potential particularly
high if a primary molar is lost just before or during
eruption of the first permanent molars. The amount
of space closure is usually less if the permanent
molars are fully erupted into occlusal interdigitation
at the time of primary tooth loss. A similar situation
exists if the first primary molar has been lost prematurely and the permanent lateral incisor is in an active
state of eruption. The eruption of the permanent
lateral incisor may result in distal movement of the
primary canine and encroachment on space available.
This condition is frequently accompanied by a shift in

422

Chapter 22

n

Managing the Developing Occlusion

the midline toward the area of the loss. In the mandibular arch, a lingual “collapse” of the anterior segment may occur, with a resulting increased overbite.
Another factor is in terms of available abutments for
securing a space maintainer at the time of the primary
tooth loss. A second primary molar lost at 5 years
of age requires different abutment considerations
than one lost during the mixed dentition when first
permanent molars have erupted. Also, teeth actively
erupting adjacent to the edentulous area have a
greater effect on the amount of space lost than do
fully erupted teeth. For example, if the first primary
molar is lost during the time of active eruption of the
first permanent molar, a strong forward force will be
exerted on the second primary molar that causes it
to tip into the space required for eruption of the first
premolar. Changes may extend anteriorly with shift
of the dental midline and retrusion of the anterior
segment after early loss of a first primary molar.
4.	Amount of space closure. Loss of maxillary second primary molars results in the greatest amount of closure,
up to 8 mm of space loss in a quadrant (see Fig. 22-4,
B). Loss of mandibular second primary molars shows
the next greatest amount—up to 4 mm in a quadrant (see Fig. 22-3, A and C). Loss of upper or lower
first primary molars shows almost equal amounts of
space closure when compared with one another; the
amount is most affected by timing of the first primary
molar loss (see Fig. 22-4, A). Space loss potential is
particularly high if the primary molar loss occurs
in approximation to first permanent molar eruption, irrespective of which primary molar is lost and
in which arch the loss occurs. After first permanent
molars have erupted into occlusion, loss of second
primary molars may still result in significant space
closure. Loss of a first primary molar with retention of
the second primary molar shows minimal amounts of
space closure because the second primary molar serves
to buttress first permanent molar positions after occlusion is established.
5.	Direction of closure. Maxillary posterior spaces close
predominantly by mesial bodily movement and
mesiolingual rotation around the palatal root of the
first permanent molars. Only minimal mesial crowntipping of the first molar is usually noted. In contrast,
mandibular spaces close primarily by mesial tipping
of the first permanent molars, along with distal movement and retroclination of teeth anterior to the space
(see Fig. 22-3, C). Bodily movement of first molars is
not typically notable in the lower arch as seen in the
upper arch. Lower molars also tend to roll lingually in
conjunction with their mesial crown-tipping during
space loss movements.
6.	Eruption timing of permanent successors. Grøn,15 in
evaluating the emergence of permanent teeth, found
that teeth normally erupt when three fourths of the
root is developed, regardless of the child’s chronologic age. However, the eruption timing of a permanent successor may be delayed or accelerated after
premature loss of a primary tooth, depending on the
developmental status, bone density of the area, and

nature of the primary tooth loss. Very early loss before significant root formation of the permanent successor usually results in delayed eruption timing that
may alter normal transitional adjustments in arch
length, arch width, and arch circumference. Several
studies have indicated that loss of a primary molar
before 7 years of age leads to delayed emergence of
the succedaneous tooth, whereas loss after 7 years of
age leads to early emergence. The magnitude of any
timing change in eruption is affected by age at time of
tooth loss; if a primary molar is lost at 4 years of age,
the emergence of the premolar could be delayed by
as much as 1 year, with emergence occurring at root
completion. If the loss occurs at 6 years of age, a delay
of about 6 months is more likely, with emergence
seen when root development approaches completion.
Primary tooth loss within 6 to 12 months of normal
exfoliation time may result in acceleration in eruption
timing of the underlying permanent tooth.
Individual permanent teeth are often observed to be delayed in their development and, consequently, in their
eruption timing. Impacted permanent teeth or deviations in eruption paths may be reflected in abnormally
delayed eruption times. In cases of this type, it is generally necessary to extract the primary tooth, construct
a space maintainer, and allow the permanent tooth to
erupt and assume its normal position (Fig. 22-5). The
exact timing of permanent tooth eruption is less important in overall occlusal development compared with its
greater significance relative to sequencing, site of eruption, and adequate space for subsequent eruption.
7.	Amount of bone covering the nonerupted tooth. Prediction
of eruption based on timing of primary tooth loss and
stage of root development is not reliable if the bone
covering the permanent tooth has been destroyed by
infection. Emergence is then usually accelerated. If there
is bone covering the tooth, it can be predicted that eruption will not readily occur. A guide is that premolars
usually require about 4 to 6 months to move through 1
mm of bone, as measured on bitewing radiographs.
8.	Abnormal oral musculature. Strong mentalis muscle
patterns may have a pronounced negative effect after
loss of mandibular primary molars or canines, with
collapse of the arch and the distal drifting of the anterior segment that is often exhibited. Thumb or finger
habits may similarly produce abnormal forces in
initiating collapse of the dental arches after untimely
loss of primary teeth.
9.	Congenital absence of the permanent tooth. Before space
maintenance, the presence of a normal successor
must be ensured before space maintenance through
radiographic evaluation. Should the succedaneous
tooth be congenitally absent or significantly malformed, the decision is a challenging one, whether to
hold the space for many years until a permanent prosthesis can be provided or to allow space closure with
the likelihood of orthodontic treatment to achieve
proper alignment.
When utilized, a space maintainer must fulfill the fundamental role of preventing untoward mesial migration of buccal segments and lingual collapse of anterior

Chapter 22

n

Managing the Developing Occlusion

423

Figure 22-5 Extraction of the second primary molar and space maintenance were indicated because of prolonged retention of

the primary tooth and impaction of the second premolar. The second premolar eventually erupted into its normal position.
segments in maintaining the mesiodistal dimensions
of the prematurely lost primary tooth. The appliance
should not interfere with masticatory function, nor
should it inhibit or deflect normal growth changes. It
should be simple to construct and maintain; durable,
strong, and stable; passive in not imposing pressures
on remaining teeth that might affect orthodontic
movements; and easily cleanable without enhancing
dental caries or soft-tissue pathology. Beyond these
fundamental roles, space maintainers may be designed
to prevent supraeruption of teeth opposing the space,
improve esthetics, and assist in speech (i.e., anterior
space maintainers in control of oral habits).
When a primary tooth is lost prematurely, a space
maintainer need not be automatically necessary or
desirable. The decision to place a space maintainer and
the choice of design to use are affected by the following: the specific tooth that was lost, from which arch,
at what time, whether the permanent successor is present and developing normally, the patient’s overall oral
health status and motivation, and the status of existing
arch length to accommodate the permanent teeth. If
analysis indicates a positive arch length or deficiency
of less than 1 to 2 mm per quadrant, a space maintainer may be beneficial in holding tooth positions.
If the space is not held, the total arch length may be
further decreased and lead to possible premolar extraction requirements. Holding the space may allow the
permanent premolars and canines to erupt and utilize
leeway space to alleviate anterior crowding. However,
if the arch length deficiency is 2 to 3 mm or more per
quadrant, a significant discrepancy exists where space
regaining, serial extraction, and/or comprehensive
orthodontic treatment may be indicated. If there is no

question that permanent teeth will have to be removed
to obtain a favorable occlusion, space maintenance
may not be desirable because the space would need to
be closed during orthodontic treatment anyway. In less
obvious extraction cases, holding the space to allow
teeth to erupt and prevent impactions can be a valuable service. As related to the premature loss of specific
primary teeth, the arch involved, and developmental
timing, the following recommendations are made with
regard to placement and design of space maintainers.

SPECIFIC TOOTH LOSS STRATEGIES
Loss of Primary Incisors
Early loss of lower primary incisors is generally due to ectopic eruption of the permanent incisors in reflecting excessive incisor liability. Given the potential for increased
intracanine width during permanent incisor eruption, the
clinician should monitor development in the lower incisor area and generally not intervene. Individual circumstances may indicate extraction of the antimere primary
incisor to enhance incisor positioning and midline symmetry. The loss of lower incisors in other circumstances,
such as trauma, advanced caries, or extraction of a neonatal tooth, may result in anterior space loss if it occurs
before primary canine stabilization is realized.
Premature loss of maxillary primary incisors does not
generally result in decreased upper intracanine dimensions if the incisor loss occurs after the primary canines
have erupted into occlusion at approximately 2 years of
age. The support of the mandibular occlusion “holds” the
maxillary anterior intracanine width dimensions. Baume
type I spaced primary dentitions have significant latitude
to resist arch dimensional changes. If the anterior primary
teeth were in contact before the loss or there is evidence

424

Chapter 22

n

Managing the Developing Occlusion

A

A

B

B

Figure 22-6 A, Child with some loss of space in the primary

incisor area that was observed at the time of the first examination. B, Space closure continued and was accompanied
by drifting of teeth throughout the anterior area, including
the canines.

of an arch length inadequacy in the anterior region, space
adjustments in alignment after the loss of one of the primary incisors is a potential factor in space maintenance
(Fig. 22-6). The major consequence of early loss of maxillary primary incisors is most likely delayed eruption timing of the permanent successors as reparative bone and
dense connective tissue cover the site. In addition, unattractive appearance and potential development of deleterious habits (e.g., tongue-thrust swallow, forward resting
posture of the tongue, improper pronunciation of fricative
sounds such as “s” and “f”) may be of concern following
premature loss of primary maxillary incisors. An anterior
appliance incorporating artificial primary teeth may be
considered to satisfy aesthetic and functional needs. Acrylic partial dentures have been successful in the replacement
of single (Fig. 22-7) and multiple (Fig. 22-8) maxillary primary incisors. Given the demands of cooperation in wear
and frequent appliance loss or damage, such removable
appliances can be problematic in preschool-age children.
A fixed option using primary incisor denture teeth secured from a rigid stainless steel wire (0.036- or 0.040-inch)
extended to bands or stainless steel crowns on the primary
molars, a so-called “Hollywood” bridge, may be a more

Figure 22-7 A, This 3½-year-old child has lost a primary in-

cisor as the result of trauma. B, A removable palatal retainer
with a primary central incisor pontic has been constructed
to prevent space closure and to restore normal appearance.

predictable option (Fig. 22-9). One can obtain additional
stabilization in keeping the wire from flexing by placing
an occlusal rest on the first primary molar, using a Nance
button, or by covering the ridge with acrylic resin. Use of
such an appliance incorporating artificial primary anterior
teeth is an option for addressing primarily aesthetic demands rather than specific space management concerns.

Loss of Primary Canines
Most often due to ectopic eruption of permanent lateral
incisors, early loss of a mandibular primary canine is a
significant indicator of a tooth size–arch size discrepancy.
Unilateral loss of a lower primary canine is frequently followed by a shift in the dental midline toward the side of
loss, lingual collapse of the incisor segment, and possibly
deepening of the bite (Figs. 22-10, A and B). The asymmetric disruption in arch integrity complicates normal
eruption of the permanent canines and premolars toward
the affected side. If ectopic eruption involves bilateral
loss of both lower primary canines, pronounced lingual
inclination and distal drifting of the permanent incisors,
deepening of the overbite, increased overjet, and significant loss of arch perimeter are likely to be the alignment
results (see Figs. 22-10, C and D).

Chapter 22

A

B

n

Managing the Developing Occlusion

425

If one primary canine is lost during incisor eruption,
it may be desirable to extract the contralateral primary
canine to help maintain arch symmetry. Although extraction of the contralateral primary canine may improve the
appearance of incisor alignment and midline integrity,
crowding problems requiring such intervention strongly
indicate a significant arch length deficiency that will likely become grossly evident upon permanent canine and
premolar eruption. Some clinicians recommend a lingual
holding arch with spur attachments to control incisor
positioning and prevent encroachment on permanent
canine eruption positions when primary canines are lost
prematurely. Even though this may be feasible in some
cases, the asymmetric positioning and displacement of
the incisors typically contradict simple placement of a
lingual holding arch at this stage without first aligning
the incisors with active appliance therapy. The inherent questionable prognosis relative to arch length–tooth
size considerations brings into question simple appliance
therapy at this point in development. Regardless of the
individual decision, the prognosis related to ectopic loss
of primary canines is generally not good concerning the
status of long-range occlusion.
The ectopic loss of maxillary primary canines occurs
less frequently than does mandibular loss, given more favorable space adjustments for incisor liability. When it
occurs, ectopic loss of a maxillary primary canine typically reflects a very distal eruptive displacement of the
permanent lateral incisor and not necessarily a significant
tooth mass problem. Atypical upper anterior alignment
may occur, with resultant crowding and blockage of the
permanent canine because it erupts so late in normal
transition. Early loss of maxillary primary canines is an
indicator for early orthodontic treatment with an understanding that the child is a definite candidate for comprehensive orthodontic intervention.

Loss of First Primary Molars

C
Figure 22-8 A, This 4-year-old child required removal

of nonrestorable maxillary primary incisors and first primary molars. B, Stainless steel crowns were placed on the
primary canines and second molars. C, A maxillary removable partial retainer with incisor pontics maintains space,
improves appearance, and reduces the possibility of a
tongue-thrust.

The effect of premature loss of first primary molars in both
arches is mostly dependent on the state of eruption of the
first permanent molars. If the primary first molar is lost
during the primary dentition from ages 3 to 5 years, there
should be little or no space loss associated with mesial
movement of the second primary molar. However, as first
permanent molars erupt at ages 5 to 7 years, a strong force
is exerted that pushes the second primary molar forward
into the first primary molar space (see Fig. 22-3, B). This
results in a loss of posterior arch length within the quadrant that can lead to crowding as the canines and premolars erupt in later stages. In addition to posterior effects,
mandibular arch length may be further compromised by
distal and lingual shifting of anterior teeth toward the
side of first primary molar tooth loss. Therefore the loss of
a first primary molar in either arch, approximating eruption of first permanent molars, indicates that the use of a
space maintainer is generally desirable to stabilize second
primary molar and canine positioning.
If the first primary molar is lost after first permanent
molars have erupted into occlusion and the second primary molar is still in position, minimal space loss should
be evidenced in either arch. This is particularly applica-

426

Chapter 22

n

Managing the Developing Occlusion

A

B

C

D

E

F

Figure 22-9 Early loss of maxillary primary incisors in 4½-year-old child. A, Pretreatment caries with nonrestorable maxillary
primary incisors. B, C, and D, Postrestorative appearance with multiple stainless steel crowns. While interdigitation should
hold anterior intercanine space, the parents and patient requested cosmetic incisor replacement. E and F, A fixed space maintainer with a “Hollywood” bridge fulfills aesthetic demands as an elective treatment. Appliance used one-size-larger crowns
fitted over restorative crowns on second primary molars as abutments.

A

B

C

D

Figure 22-10 Ectopic loss of lower primary canines in association with permanent lateral incisor eruption. A and B, Unilateral
canine loss results in asymmetric arch dimensions as the incisors shift toward the side of loss and lingualize their positioning.
C and D, Bilateral ectopic loss of canines allows for maintenance of arch symmetry, but results in significant lingual retroclination and supraeruption of lower incisors, increased overjet, deepened overbite, and reduction in lower arch dimensions.

ble when first permanent molars are positioned in a full
Class I or Class II cuspal interdigitation. If first permanent molars are in an end-to-end relationship, the location, by arch, of the missing first primary molar may be
a factor in potential molar adjustments. If loss of the first

primary molar occurs in the upper arch, untoward shifting from the end-to-end occlusion may result in Class II
molar positioning. To ensure that this does not happen,
a space maintainer for the upper arch may be considered.
If the first primary molar loss occurs in the lower arch,

Chapter 22

A

C

n

Managing the Developing Occlusion

427

B

D

Figure 22-11 A and B, Pretreatment at 4½ years of age and follow-up at 7 years showing value of properly fitted and designed band-and-loop appliance to hold space for an extracted first primary molar. C, Buccal occlusion showing proper relationship of erupted first permanent molars. D, Close-up of design shows that loop is sufficiently large to allow for the eventual
eruption of the permanent tooth.

any ­molar shift would be in the direction of a Class I relationship. Space maintenance would be less likely unless
absolute preservation of leeway space was indicated until
permanent canines and premolars erupt.
A unilateral fixed space maintainer called a band or crown
and loop is usually the appliance of choice for early loss
of first primary molars (Video 22-1: Managing occlusion:
­delivery of immediate band and loop). The appliance incorporates a band or crown on the second primary molar with
a soldered wire-loop extension extending forward to come
into contact with the distal-cervical surface of the primary
canine in the quadrant (Fig. 22-11). The loop uses 0.036- or
0.040-inch stainless steel wire strong enough to withstand
biting forces while ensuring a rigid abutment contact in
stopping forward movement of the second primary molar
and distal movement of the primary canine. Wire design
approximates the gingival contour of the extraction space
to avoid occlusal interference and is wide enough to allow
the permanent tooth to erupt. A modification of the design
is use of a single-wire extension “arm” rather than a full loop
from the posterior abutment to come into contact with the
anterior abutment (Fig. 22-12). The single arm of 0.036- or
0.040-inch stainless steel wire is rigid enough to hold the
space while reducing by half possible interference with
eruption of the underlying tooth. Neither the loop nor the
arm design restores chewing function or prevents eruption
of opposing teeth, a possible consideration in some cases.
In addition, the wire may inhibit primary canine distolateral movement as permanent incisors erupt, particularly in
association with lower lateral incisor eruption. For this reason, the status of permanent incisor eruption ­sequencing,

Figure 22-12 Close-up of unilateral crown and arm space

maintainer.

­symmetry, and positioning should be monitored and guidance steps taken to optimize normal incisor eruption. The
clinician must recognize these limitations and prepare for
modifications in the overall space supervision planning.
The use of a band as the abutment attachment makes it
easy and economical to construct, takes little chair time,
and adjusts readily to accommodate the changing dentition. The use of a stainless steel crown as the abutment
base (Fig. 22-13) offers the advantage of increased stability and retention. A crown is used if the second primary
molar has extensive caries or if the tooth has had vital
pulp therapy. The steel crown should be prepared as described in Chapter 11: an impression is made, the crown

428

Chapter 22

n

Managing the Developing Occlusion

A

B

C

D

Figure 22-13 A and B, Pretreatment of upper and lower arches with caries and pulp involvement of primary molars. C and
D, Same upper and lower arches with crowns and loops placed for early loss of three first primary molars. Note erupted first
permanent molars with proper positioning.

A

B

Figure 22-14 A, Pretreatment of lower arch with caries and pulp involvement of primary molars. B, Same lower arch with
band and loop placed over a restored crown on the second primary molar for early loss of right first primary molars. The band
was fabricated from the next-larger-sized crown by removing the occlusal surface and shortening the cervical portion of the
crown. Note erupted first permanent molars with proper positioning.

removed from the tooth and seated in the impression,
and a working model prepared on which to fabricate the
loop. Because it is difficult to remove the crown (converted to a band) to make adjustments, adapting a band or
one-size-larger crown over a cemented crown restoration
or constructing a conventional band-and-loop appliance
is another alternative to address unilateral space maintenance (Fig. 22-14).
If first primary molars are lost bilaterally within a lower arch and the second primary molars are retained, two
separate unilateral loop appliances are generally indicated
until first permanent molar and incisor eruption is complete. Bilateral lingual holding arch designs should not be
placed before eruption of the permanent incisors because
the lingual wire may interfere with incisor positioning
during eruption. Additionally, primary incisors as anterior stops do not offer sufficient anchorage to prevent loss

of arch length in most cases. Either of the loop or arm designs is relatively effective as long as the clinician realizes
that the appliances are dependent on abutment teeth that
may exfoliate before the need for space maintenance is
complete. After the permanent incisors have fully erupted
and as the primary canines and molars exfoliate, a second
appliance that stabilizes final permanent molar position
and arch length may be necessary to prevent subsequent
space loss.

Loss of Second Primary Molars
If a second primary molar is lost in a child 2 to 5 years
of age, no space loss should occur while the first permanent molar is in basal bone. The options for managing
such early loss are very limited due to lack of retention
elements for fixed appliances and difficulties with patient
cooperation in the use of appliances at this age. As first

Chapter 22

Figure 22-15 A sequence of three radiographs showing

early loss of a lower second primary molar and mesial
movement of the first permanent molar before eruption.
Eventually there was complete closure of the space needed
for the second premolar.
permanent molars erupt, however, considerable loss in
arch length can occur if no second primary molar is present as an eruptive guide (Fig. 22-15). Space loss of as much
as 8 mm in a maxillary quadrant has been documented
as the first permanent molar displaces forward through
bodily crown-root movement and mesiolingual rotation
around the palatal root. Early loss of lower second primary molars in conjunction with first permanent molar

n

Managing the Developing Occlusion

429

eruption timing results in up to 4 to 6 mm of space loss
during transition. The lower first molars move forward
by pronounced mesial tipping of the crown, with more
modest bodily tooth movement expressed in molar adjustments. Distal movement and retroclination of teeth
anterior to the space are also a likely consequence of early
loss in the lower arch. If the loss of the second primary
molar occurs after the first permanent molars have fully
erupted and normal cuspal interdigitation has been established, the degree of space loss should be less dramatic
than earlier during molar transition, regardless of the arch
involved. However, mesial movement of the permanent
molar through lack of buttressing support from the missing second primary molar usually results in space loss
that may be significant. Quadrant space loss of 2 to 3 mm
without the buttressing support of the second primary
molar may be realized—easily enough to compromise positioning of the permanent canines and premolars.
Given the findings regarding space loss with second
primary molars, a space maintainer is generally indicated
in most patients to control permanent molar positions.
If the loss occurs just before eruption of the first permanent molar, that is, when the first molar crown is still
covered with oral mucosa and a thin partial covering of
bone, a space maintainer to guide the positioning of the
first permanent molar into normal occlusion is desirable.
The appliance of choice is a distal shoe for both the maxillary (Fig. 22-16) and mandibular arches. The appliance
incorporates a posterior wire-loop extension from the first
primary molar that supports a vertical tissue blade positioned to come into contact with and guide the erupting
permanent molar into normal position. The depth of the
intragingival extension should be about 1.0 to 1.5 mm
beyond the mesial marginal ridge of the molar, to “capture” the surface as the tooth erupts vertically. Gauged in
length to represent the missing second molar, accurate
placement is critical to ensure that the distal shoe does
not extend too far distally over the first molar and block
its eruption, nor be too short and not maintain the space
occupied by the lost second primary molar. It has been
observed that the soft tissue tolerates the blade extension
well, although a small metallic “tattoo” in the gingiva
may result.
The first primary molar is first prepared with a stainless
steel crown or well-adapted band that provides a retentive
base for the distal shoe. An impression is made to prepare
a working model. If the primary second molar has not yet
been extracted, it is cut off the model and a hole made
with a bur that simulates the position of the distal root of
the tooth. If the second primary molar has been removed
previously, the positioning of the tissue extension may be
determined with measurements on bitewing or periapical
radiographs or by measurement of the mesiodistal width
of the contralateral second molar. The extension blade is
contoured and extended distally into the prepared opening on the model, and the loop is soldered to the band or
crown. An alternative design is the use of an adjustable
Gerber extension involving a trombone-type attachment
with the sleeve portion tach-welded or soldered to the
band or crown (see Fig. 22-16). The sliding extension can
be positioned into the tube sleeve and the posterior length

430

Chapter 22

n

Managing the Developing Occlusion

adjusted to the proper spacing with the blade extension
positioned directly into the extraction space or a surgical incision made just at the mesial contact area of the
erupting first permanent molar. Crimping of the sleeve
tube holds the length of the established extension loop.
Ideally, the tach-welded area should be supported with
additional solder to reinforce the appliance’s resistance
to occlusal forces. Before final placement, a radiograph of
the distal shoe in position should be made to determine
whether the extension is in proper relationship with the
unerupted first permanent molar. Final adjustments in
length and contour may be made to ensure that mesial
contact of the first permanent molar is provided. Brill,16
in describing chair-side fabrication procedures, presents
the distal shoe as an efficient and cost-effective appliance
for guiding the unerupted permanent first molar into position, with success rates relatively equal to those reported
from studies of the longevity of other space maintainers.
Several conditions contraindicate the use of distal shoe
appliances. Given the extent of caries involvement, there
may be lack of abutments to support a cemented appliance. Poor oral hygiene or lack of patient and parental
cooperation greatly reduces the possibility of a successful
clinical result. Histologic studies show that the distal shoe
does not become lined with epithelium and is associated
with a chronic inflammatory response. Therefore certain

medical conditions such as blood dyscrasias, immunosuppression, congenital heart defects, history of rheumatic fever, and diabetes contraindicate the use of the appliance.
If the distal shoe is contraindicated, two possibilities for
treatment exist: (1) allow the tooth to erupt and regain
space later, or (2) use a removable or fixed appliance that
does not penetrate the tissue but places pressure on the
ridge mesial to the unerupted permanent molar (Fig. 2217). Carroll and Jones17 reported on a pressure-type appliance successfully used to guide the permanent molar as it
erupted. Given the fact that the first permanent molars are
guided in their eruption by the distal-cervical aspect of the
second primary molar, the acrylic or pressure extension
usually serves as an ineffective guide for eruptive positioning. The removable extension is more likely to work in the
lower arch if the eruption bulge area of the first permanent
molar can be engaged with the acrylic. If several teeth are
missing, the removable appliance can serve to restore
function and prevent supereruption of opposing teeth.
After the first permanent molar has been guided into
position, a distal shoe is usually indicated for replacement
with a different appliance. Continued vertical development will usually result in tipping of the permanent first
molar over the top of the blade extension, with resulting space loss and tissue complications. One option is to
remove the intragingival extension and replace it with a

C

D
Figure 22-16 A, The second primary molar is nonrestorable and
must be extracted. A crown with
a distal shoe extension to help
guide the first permanent molar
has been placed. B, Picture of a
prefabricated crown with Gerbertype distal shoe extension as used
in the case. C, D, and E, Progress
can be seen on radiographs in
guiding the eruption of the permanent molar over 12 months.

A

B

E

Chapter 22

reverse band and loop, using an occlusally directed extension to prevent the molar from tipping over the wire.
Exfoliation of the first primary molar as an abutment
may also occur before eruption of the second premolars.
Therefore once the first permanent molars have erupted
sufficiently to be banded, a more preferred option for the
replacement of a distal shoe is the use of a bilateral space
maintainer such as a mandibular lingual holding arch,
maxillary transpalatal bar, or maxillary Nance appliance.
These same bilateral space maintainers are the method of
choice to provide stability to first permanent molar positions whenever the second primary molars are lost and
first permanent molars have erupted into occlusion. Even
after first permanent molar occlusion is established, the
loss of second primary molars will potentially result in
significant amounts of closure without the buttressing effect of the primary second molar.
The classic bilateral mixed-dentition space maintainer
in the mandibular arch is the soldered lingual holding
arch (Fig. 22-18). With bands fitted to the first permanent
molars, a 0.036- or 0.040-inch stainless steel wire is contoured to the arch and extended forward to make contact with the cingulum area of the incisors (Fig. 22-19).

n

Managing the Developing Occlusion

431

The design stabilizes lower molar positions from moving
mesially and incisor relationships from retroclining lingually in sustaining the canine-premolar segment space
(i.e., leeway space). The lingual wire must simply be contoured not to interfere with normal eruption paths and
provide an anterior arch form so that the incisors have
an opportunity for alignment. In the mixed dentition,
the soldered lingual holding arch should present minimal
problems with breakage, minimal oral hygiene concerns,
minimal interference in eruptive movements of permanent
canines and premolars, and no concerns about whether the
child is wearing the appliance. Importantly, the bilateral
design and use of permanent teeth as abutments allow for
application during the full transitional dentition period of
the buccal segments. As stated earlier, lower lingual arches
should not be placed before the eruption of the permanent
incisors because of their frequent lingual eruption path.
The lingual wire may interfere with normal incisor positioning if the appliance is in position before lateral incisor
eruption. Additionally, abutting against primary incisors as
anterior stops does not offer sufficient anchorage to prevent significant loss of arch length.

Figure 22-19 Proper design of a passive mandibular solFigure 22-17 A modified distal shoe “pressure” appliance to

provide bilateral space maintenance and eruption guidance
for the first permanent molars. The permanent molars are
erupting properly, and the intragingival extensions may be
removed.

A

B

dered lingual holding arch positioned with wire contact
at the cingulum area of the permanent incisors. The wire
offsets and contours to position the wire away from the
eruption path of buccal segment teeth and to avoid tongue
irritation. Note the excess “leeway” space in the premolar
area secondary to the appliance, preventing a late mesial
shift of the permanent molars.

C

Figure 22-18 Lingual holding arch for bilateral space maintenance and guidance of buccal segment eruption patterns.
A, Initial appliance placement in conjunction with primary molar extractions. B, Eruption transition at 6 months after extractions. C, Eruption status at 1 year. Note improvement in anterior and buccal segment alignment.

432

Chapter 22

n

Managing the Developing Occlusion

Used in the maxillary arch to stabilize molar positions
bilaterally, the soldered transpalatal bar incorporates a
transverse palatal wire of 0.036- or 0.040-inch stainless
steel wire soldered to molar abutments (Fig. 22-20, A).
The rigid transverse wire prevents the two main space
loss patterns of upper first permanent molars: mesiobuccal rotation and anterior bodily displacement. While the
appliance may allow some minor mesial tipping of the
upper molars, this is generally considered insignificant
in terms of overall space loss in the maxillary arch. The
simple transpalatal contour of the connector wire offers
the main argument for this appliance: It is easy to fabricate and offers minimal irritation to the palatal tissue or
tongue. The Nance appliance uses a contoured rigid wire
with an acrylic “button” in contact with the palatal shelf
as an anterior stop for bilateral molar stabilization in the
maxillary arch (see Fig. 22-20, B). Providing the same molar rotation and bodily movement control as transpalatal
bars, the added bracing of the acrylic button against the
anterior palatal vault offers some additional resistance
against forward tipping movements of the molars. Although the bilateral stability of the transpalatal appliance
appears adequate in most situations, the resistance of the
Nance with its acrylic palatal stop is preferred by some
clinicians. Tissue irritation beneath the button does not
appear to be a clinical problem in most cases if proper
hygiene is performed.
The fixed space maintainers as described have the distinct advantage that they are stable, not easily broken,
and wear is not dependent on the child. Ensuring that the
appliance is passive and does not cause unwanted tooth
movement is generally the greatest concern. Proper design should minimize eruption interference and the effects of unfavorable abutment loss or impingement of soft
tissues. Poor band fit or defective cement may serve as a
locus for debris accumulation and subsequent decalcification. Steps to prevent this include adapting a band that
contours tightly to the tooth surface and extends beneath
the gingival margins, providing a thorough prophylaxis
before cementation, keeping the tooth thoroughly dry
during cementation, using glass-ionomer cements, and
teaching the child and parent proper oral hygiene practices
to include the use of fluoride rinses. Closely checking the

A

appliance at 6-month intervals to monitor potential problems is the standard protocol.

Areas of Multiple Primary Molar Loss
Loss of multiple primary molars may lead to mutilation of
the developing dentition unless an appliance is constructed to maintain relationships of the remaining teeth and
to guide eruption of the developing teeth. In addition to
arch dimension concerns, reduced masticatory function
is undesirable from a nutritional standpoint. Removable
acrylic partial dentures have been used successfully in either arch after the loss of multiple teeth. If artificial teeth
are included, an essentially normal degree of function
and acceptable aesthetics can be restored. The disadvantages lie in their unpredictability outside the clinician’s
control because the appliances require patient cooperation and can be easily lost or broken during wear. During
the transitional stages of exfoliation and eruption, stability of removable appliances is often difficult to sustain
with the loss of abutments. The wire clasps and resin contact areas may present “food traps” for plaque accumulation, with increased potential for soft-tissue irritation and
dental caries.
If the loss of one or both of the second primary molars
occurs a short time before the eruption of the first permanent molars, the acrylic removable appliance may be
considered in preference to one of the distal shoe maintainers described previously. An acrylic partial denture
with a distal extension may be used to guide first permanent molars into position (Fig. 22-21). The teeth to be
extracted are cut away from the stone cast, and a depression is cut into the stone model to allow for fabrication of
the acrylic extension. The acrylic will extend into the alveolus after removal of the primary teeth. The extension
may be removed after eruption of the permanent tooth.
It is occasionally necessary to recommend extraction of
all the primary teeth in a preschool child. Although this
was more common in the prefluoridation era, some children even today must have all of their teeth removed because of widespread oral infection and because the teeth
are nonrestorable. Preschool children can wear complete
dentures successfully before the eruption of permanent
teeth (Fig. 22-22).

B

Figure 22-20 Bilateral fixed space maintainers for maxillary molar control. A, Soldered transpalatal bar with 0.036-inch stain-

less steel wire contoured to traverse the palatal contour. The appliance prevents forward bodily movement and rotation of
molars around palatal roots. B, Nance appliance incorporates a 0.036-inch stainless steel wire that traverses the arch with a
midline acrylic button positioned against the anterior palatal contour. The design prevents molars from forward bodily movement, rotation around the palatal roots, and mesial tipping.

Chapter 22

Loss of First Permanent Molars
The first permanent molar is unquestionably the most
important unit of mastication and is essential in the development of a functionally desirable occlusion. A caries
lesion may develop rapidly in the first permanent molar and occasionally progress from an incipient lesion to
a pulp exposure in a 6-month period. The loss of a first
permanent molar in a child can lead to changes in the
dental arches that can be traced throughout the child’s

n

Managing the Developing Occlusion

433

life. Unless appropriate corrective measures are instituted,
these changes include diminished local function, drifting
of teeth, and continued eruption of opposing teeth.
The second molars, even if unerupted, start to drift mesially after the loss of the first permanent molar. A greater
degree of forward bodily movement will occur with loss
of the first permanent molar in 8- to 12-year-old children. In older children, if the loss occurs after eruption
of the second permanent molar, more exaggerated mesial

B

A

C

D

E
Figure 22-21 A, Clinical and radiographic examination revealed need for extraction of both maxillary first primary molars and
the left second primary molar at age 6 years. B, The teeth indicated for extraction are cut away from the stone model, and a
depression is made in the second molar area for an acrylic distal shoe-type extension. C, The primary teeth have been extracted in preparation for the placement of the partial denture. D, The acrylic distal shoe extension. E, Lead foil has been placed
over the tissue extension to determine, with the aid of a radiograph, whether the acrylic is positioned properly to guide the
eruption of the first permanent molar. (Courtesy Dr. Paul E. Starkey.)

434

Chapter 22

n

Managing the Developing Occlusion

A

B

Figure 22-22 A, Primary teeth with
rampant gross caries and pulpal
involvement. B, Complete dentures
in place after the extraction of all
primary teeth. C, Modification of the
dentures after eruption of upper first
permanent molars and lower permanent incisors.

C

tipping of the second molar can be the expected outcome. Although the premolars undergo the greatest
amount of distal drifting, all the teeth anterior to the
space, including the central and lateral incisors on the
side where the loss occurred, may show evidence of
movement. Contacts open and the premolars, in particular, rotate as they fall distally. There is a tendency
for the maxillary premolars to move distally in unison,
whereas those in the lower arch may move separately.
When the maxillary first permanent molar loses its opponent, it erupts at a faster rate than the adjacent teeth.
The alveolar process is also carried along with the molars
and causes problems when prosthetic replacements are
needed. The treatment of patients with the loss of first
permanent molars must be approached on an individual
basis. A superimposed existing malocclusion, abnormal

musculature, or the presence of deleterious oral habits
can affect the result, as in the case of the premature loss
of primary molars.
Loss of a first permanent molar before the eruption of
the second permanent molar presents problems in both
anteroposterior space control and vertical eruption control of opposing molars. Although it is possible to prevent overeruption of a maxillary first permanent molar
by placing a lower partial denture, there is no completely effective way to influence the path of eruption of the
developing second permanent molar other than the use
of an acrylic distal shoe extension on a partial denture
as described previously. The second molar drifts mesially before eruption when the first permanent molar has
been extracted. Repositioning this tooth orthodontically
is possible after its eruption. However, the child must

Chapter 22

n

Managing the Developing Occlusion

435

Figure 22-23 Radiographs taken

at 6-month intervals after a maxillary first permanent molar was
lost before the eruption of the
second permanent molar.
then be considered for prolonged space maintenance
until the time when a more permanent tooth replacement can be inserted. The removal of the opposing first
permanent molar, even when the tooth appears to be
sound and caries-free, is sometimes recommended in
preference to allowing it to extrude or to subjecting the
child to prolonged space maintenance and eventual
fixed replacement.
If the first permanent molars are removed several years
before eruption of the second permanent molars, there
is an excellent chance that the second molars will erupt
in an acceptable position (Fig. 22-23). However, the axial
inclination of the second molars, particularly in the lower
arch, may be greater than normal.
The decision whether to allow the second molar to
drift mesially or to guide it forward in an upright position may be influenced by the presence of a third molar
of normal size. If there is a question regarding the favorable development of a third molar on the affected
side, repositioning the drifted second molar and holding
space for a replacement prosthesis are usually the treatment of choice.
When the first permanent molar is lost after the
eruption of the second permanent molar, orthodontic evaluation is indicated, and the following points
should be considered: Is the child in need of corrective
treatment other than in the first permanent molar area?
Should the space be maintained for a replacement prosthesis? Should the second molar be moved forward into
the area formerly occupied by the first molar? The latter choice is often the more satisfactory, even though
there will be a difference in the number of molars in
the opposing arch. A third molar can often be removed
to compensate for the difference. Without treatment,

the second molar will tip forward within a matter of
weeks (Fig. 22-24).
Another option to consider is autotransplantation of a
third molar into the first molar position (Fig. 22-25).18 According to Bauss and colleagues, autotransplantation has
become a well-established treatment modality in cases of
early tooth loss or aplasia.19 For third molars with partly
developed roots, transplantation success rates have been
reported to range from 74% to 100%.

ORAL HABITS IN CHILDREN
BRUXISM
Defined as nonfunctional grinding or gnashing of teeth,
bruxism has been reported in up to 15% of children
and young adults. Usually occurring at night, bruxism
can result in significant abrasion of primary and permanent teeth if continued over a prolonged period (Fig.
22-26). A vinyl bite-guard that covers occlusal surfaces
of all teeth can be worn at night to prevent continued
abrasion. The occlusal surface of the bite-guard should
be flat to avoid occlusal interference. A mouth guard
of the type described in Chapter 24 may also help in
overcoming the habit. Ramfjord20 believes that occlusal
interference may trigger bruxism if combined with nervous tension. Therefore occlusal equilibration can be
used to help the problem if obvious interference is present. Sheppard21 recommends construction of an anterior bite plate that allows for continued eruption of the
posterior teeth if they have been abraded by the habit.
When bruxism continues into adulthood, periodontal
disease and/or temporomandibular joint disturbances
can result.

436

Chapter 22

n

Managing the Developing Occlusion

Figure 22-24 Radiographs taken

at 6-month intervals after the
loss of a mandibular first permanent molar. Notice the degree of
tipping of the second molar and
distal drifting of the premolars.

A

B

C

Figure 22-25 Third molar autotransplantation. A, Radiograph showing failed attempt at maintaining first permanent molar

and minimal root development of third permanent molar. Radiographic (B) and clinical views (C) of third molar 15 months
after autotransplantation. Note continued root development.

Chapter 22

n

Managing the Developing Occlusion

437

DIGIT SUCKING

A

B
Figure 22-26 Bruxism resulting in severe abrasion of the

maxillary primary anterior teeth. A, Frontal view. B, Occlusal
view.

Many children suck their thumbs or fingers for short periods during infancy or early childhood, with the habit
considered normal during the first 2 years of life. If present at such an early age, parents should be advised to periodically observe the nature and intensity of the habit. If
the child demonstrates gradually diminishing activity, it
is probable that the habit will cease without intervention.
Traisman and Traisman22 reported that the average age
at which digit sucking stopped was 3.8 years, although
other studies indicate a persistent incidence of up to 20%
at age 4 years. These studies indicate that changes in the
anterior occlusion caused by digit sucking are temporary,
with little likelihood of long-term effects if the habit is
discontinued by the age of 3 to 4 years.
If the intensity of the habit persists or increases and
adverse dental and skeletal changes are noted beyond age
4 years, corrective measures may be needed to avoid undesirable occlusal problems (Fig. 22-27). By the age of 6
to 7 years, estimates indicate that approximately 10% to
15% of children have a persistent digit-sucking habit that
runs the gamut from incidental sucking at bedtime to
pronounced habits that seems to be almost constant. Almost all authorities recognize that persistent digit-sucking
habits extending into the incisor transition period can
cause a malocclusion or aggravate an already existing one.
Pressure generated from the habit can produce changes
in the anterior segments of the dental arches, with labial flaring and protrusive spacing of maxillary anterior
teeth and increased overjet. Remodeling of the maxillary
alveolar process and vertical displacement of the maxillary anterior teeth can result in an open-bite relationship.

A

C

E

B

D

F

Figure 22-27 Occlusion of three children with different patterns of digit-sucking habits. A and B, An open bite in the primary dentition caused by the child placing two fingers between the anterior teeth. C and D, An open bite with flared maxillary incisors in the
mixed dentition caused by an index-finger-sucking habit. E and F, An open bite with maxillary constriction produced by thumbsucking as presented. The maxillary constriction resulted in a posterior crossbite with a functional shift of the mandible on closure.

438

Chapter 22

n

Managing the Developing Occlusion

In addition, the digit positioning can interfere with eruption of the lower incisors, to exaggerate the open-bite
appearance in the incisor segment. Intense patterns may
contribute to pronounced lingual inclination of the mandibular incisors, which further increases the overjet situation. The increased open bite and overjet may lead to
abnormal muscle activities where the tongue protrudes
during swallowing as an adaptation to the anterior space.
Subtelny,23,24 in evaluating 34 digit-sucking children by
cineradiography, reported that 82% exhibited tonguethrust activity during swallowing. Dental findings included protruded maxillary incisors, anterior open bite, and
increased maxillary arch length as a result of atypical muscular forces from the thumb, the perioral musculature,
and forward positioning of the tongue. The child with a
persistent digit-sucking habit that results in an open bite
typically exhibits a convex profile with hypotonic upper
lip, lower lip hypertonicity with marked mentalis muscle
activity, and tongue-thrusting. These patterns maintain
and possibly intensify the developing anterior open bite
and overjet discrepancy.
The effect of prolonged digit sucking on posterior relationships is less clear. Strong muscle contractions of
the circumoral musculature with the highest force levels approximating the maxillary canine area have been
documented with extraoral habits. These may result in
a relative constriction in maxillary arch width that has
been associated with an increased development of functional posterior crossbites in children whose habits persist
past the age of 4 to 5 years. While not as profound, associations between distal-step primary molars and Class
II permanent molars have been suggested in children
whose habits extend into the transitional dentition period. Popovich and Thompson25 observed 1258 children
at the Burlington Growth Centre, representing approximately 90% of the pediatric population of Burlington,
Ontario. Many of the children were seen annually from
3 to 12 years of age, with their oral habits and occlusal
status recorded at 3, 6, 9, and 12 years of age. There was a
significant association between the prevalence of Class II
malocclusion and persisting digit sucking in the different
age groups. Class II malocclusion increased from 21.5%
at 3 and 4 years of age to 41.9% at 12 years of age, and
the probability of a Class II malocclusion increased as the
duration of the habit increased. If the habit was stopped
before 6 years of age, the effects on occlusion were often
transitory. In contrast, no child who stopped a habit after
6 years of age had a normal occlusion at age 12. An interesting observation was that children who had used a pacifier had a significantly lower rate of digit sucking. However, Zardetto and others26 point out that similar occlusal
and myofunctional alterations have been detected among
children who have prolonged pacifier habits (either conventional or physiologic pacifiers), when compared with
those with no sucking habits. Children who used a pacifier were significantly more likely to show open bite, posterior crossbite, increased overjet, and alteration in cheek
mobility than were habit-free children.
Interceptive treatments to stop a digit-sucking habit
depend upon the patient’s age, emotional and psychological state, cooperative motivation of the parents and

child, nature of occlusal changes, and associated functional adaptations. An age-based approach provides a
foundation for treatment, although individual patient
findings may result in a more aggressive approach to intervention or, more likely, may cause greater caution and
actually delay or defer treatment. These age-based concepts are as follows:
Before age 4 If one accepts the premise that a digitsucking habit will usually stop by age 4 years, and that the
effects on the occlusion are probably not permanent, then
direct intervention before this age has questionable merit.
Additionally, the child’s level of understanding complicates cooperation with any of the intervention options.
4- to 6-year age group Psychological ploys and reward systems may help some children to cease digit sucking in this age group. In conversation with the child, the
dentist discusses the problem and its effect on the teeth.
The child is asked to keep a daily record of each episode
of digit sucking and to report on his/her progress in stopping the habit. A decrease in the number of times the habit is practiced is evidence of progress and indicates that
the child will likely discontinue the habit. A positive approach involves cooperation of the parents, who are often
overanxious about the habit. This anxiety may result in
nagging or punishment, which often creates greater tension and may even intensify the habit. The parents should
consent to disregard the habit and not mention it to the
child for a more successful outcome. A timed reward system may help. For each day the child refrains from the
habit, a star is placed on a calendar. In month 1, the child
receives some reward or prize predetermined by the parent if the monthly calendar has 28 stars (i.e., two “bad”
days allowed). In month 2, the goal is 29 stars to receive
a reward. Month 3 should present a calendar completely
filled with stars. The prizes are progressively enhanced
in value for the child. If the child ceases the habit for 3
months, the long-term chances of stopping the habit and
enhancing occlusal development are good (Fig. 22-28).
Negative reinforcers such as mittens, bandages, and
bitter-tasting medicaments applied directly to the offending digit can occasionally effect a stoppage of the habit.
Many practitioners have been successful using “thumbguard” gadgets that the child wears on the thumb as a
reminder not to use the thumb. These approaches meet
greater success in children who express a desire to quit
and just need a little help—the “reinforcers” are viewed
as reminders rather than punishment.
The school-age years Although reward techniques
may work in some children aged 6 years or older, the persistent habit may be so ingrained as to present unlikely
successful stoppage with such ploys. This is the child who
has “tried to stop, but just cannot get it done.” The transition of the permanent incisors and the ingrained nature
of the habit often require direct appliance therapy, not
only to stop the habit but also to enhance proper tooth
eruption and alignment by influencing any acquired muscular patterns. A palatal crib appliance that prevents the
offending digit from being placed in the sucking position
and acts to restrain the tongue from forward positioning
is a valuable adjunct in habit therapy during the mixeddentition years (Fig. 22-29). Palatal crib designs generally

Chapter 22

n

Managing the Developing Occlusion

439

B

A

Figure 22-28 A, Open bite with some maxillary constriction evident in the mixed dentition of an 8-year-old child with a persis-

tent thumb-sucking habit. B, The child was encouraged to discontinue the habit through a positive rewards system. There was
self-correction of the open bite and transverse relationships by 9 years of age, when the dysfunctional habit was discontinued.

A

C

B

Figure 22-29 Palatal crib appliance in the mixed dentition to help the child stop a thumb-sucking habit, control forward

tongue positioning, and allow for eruptive “self-correction” of the anterior open bite. A, Pretreatment incisor open bite at
time of appliance placement. Note crib appliance’s vertical extension to level of lower incisors. B, Palatal crib appliance of
0.040-inch stainless steel. C, Posttreatment closure of open bite after 6 months of crib therapy. The habit stopped within 1
week of appliance placement.
use the first permanent molars as anchorage abutments
with a major connecting wire of standard 0.040-inch
stainless steel orthodontic wire, ensuring a strong and
stable appliance that is resistant to both digit and tongue
pressures. The crib approximates the cross-arch level of
the upper canines, with the “fence” extending vertically
to about the level of and just lingual to the lower incisors.
Positioning should ensure no occlusal interference in all
functional excursions and allow clearance for upper incisors to lingualize into normal inclinations. The posterior
transpalatal wire provides further rigidity and prevents
constriction of maxillary intermolar width through pressures placed on the “fence” by the tongue or digit.
Palatal crib appliances are particularly effective in promoting a favorable environment for self-correction of
incisor open bite if applied when incisors are in active
eruption phases. Labial flaring of the incisors should be
reduced by the action of the upper lip when the digit and
the tongue are no longer acting as opposing forces. Most
children accommodate to the palatal crib in a short time,
and rarely are any problems lasting ones. Haryett and associates27,28 reported that, upon insertion of palatal crib
appliances, nearly 80% of patients stopped sucking their
thumbs within 7 days after insertion of the appliance.
They also reported that if the appliance was removed 3
months after insertion, the chance of the habit recurring
was likely. The best chance of lasting success occurred

when the appliance was left in place for 6 to 10 months.
Therefore it is recommended that the fixed palatal crib
be treatment-planned to be worn for a period of 6 to
8 months.
The child’s cooperation should be obtained when a
palatal crib appliance is placed. The function of the appliance is to “help” and to “remind” the patient—the appliance cannot break the habit by itself without the child’s
cooperation. Failure to gain at least tacit cooperation will
usually result in failure because the child resorts to new
habit postures, complains, and causes such a commotion
that the parent demands removal or the child even physically removes or distorts the appliance deliberately. Because cooperation and motivation are critical to success,
the child should be told that the appliance is being used
to help him/her to stop sucking the thumb that has affected the position of the teeth. Some temporary difficulty
with speech and eating should also be anticipated upon
placement, with most children accommodating in a short
time. Some patients present with palatal irritation of the
crib at about a month into appliance wear. This is usually
attributable to pressures from the tongue pushing the appliance upward and is more common if second primary
molars are used as anchorage abutments. Simple adjustment with intraoral three-pronged pliers can be used to
bend the anterior crib away from the tissue. This adjustment is usually necessary only at the initial fi
­ rst-month

440

Chapter 22

n

Managing the Developing Occlusion

check because the tongue soon adapts and “reprograms”
from forward positioning.
Positive changes in open bite and overjet should be
notable by 3 months into treatment, and self-correction
should be achieved by the sixth month of the appliance
protocol. If protrusion of the maxillary incisors and anterior open bite have not “self-corrected” after the habit
and tongue-thrust are controlled, the discrepancy should
be reevaluated to ensure that other problems (e.g., lip
sucking) are not factors. In these situations, additional
orthodontic treatment may be indicated to align the protruded and flared incisors into normal overbite and overjet positions. Older children in the late mixed or young
permanent dentition stage, with more established occlusal relationships, prolonged atypical functional patterns,
and less eruptive potential, are less likely to demonstrate
self-correction. They usually require corrective orthodontic treatment with Edgewise techniques.
Variations of the palatal crib, ranging from simple
wires contoured to the palate without vertical extensions,
to appliances incorporating reminder aspects (e.g., rollers on the Bluegrass appliance, a removable Hawley-type
appliance), to the use of “rakes,” “spurs,” or “spikes” extending from the crib-wire or bands, have been advocated
by various clinicians. A removable partial retainer with a
series of smooth loops placed lingual to the incisors has
proved successful in helping a child overcome a habit
(Fig. 22-30). However, because a child may have a strong
physical and emotional urge to continue the habit and
not a strong resolve to quit, the use of a removable crib
appliance is much less likely to succeed when compared
with a fixed-crib approach. The Bluegrass appliance (Fig.
22-31) incorporates a modified, six-sided roller constructed to spin around a 0.045-inch stainless steel wire when
rolled by the tongue. Haskell and Mink29 reported successful stoppage of thumb-sucking in children using the
appliance with a program of positive reinforcement. The
use of rakes and spurs in habit therapy has also been reported with success, although Haryett and associates27,28
found that 27% of children wearing a “rake” had transitory sleep disturbances compared with only 8% of children
wearing a palatal crib. They also found that 14 (21.2%)
of 66 children being treated developed mannerisms that
persisted even after appliance therapy was discontinued.
These included nail biting, chewing of hair or clothing,
scratching of the body, and cracking of knuckles, but no
enuresis. Davidson and associates30 reported that 36% of
thumb-sucking children who received no treatment and
were still actively thumb-sucking also developed other
mannerisms. Thus there was no greater substitution of
mannerisms when a habit was treated with an appliance
than when a habit was not treated. With no significant
advantages in treatment effectiveness seen by other designs in the context of early intervention, the basic palatal crib appliance remains the recommended appliance
design of choice for treating digit-sucking habits in the
transitional dentition.

TONGUE-THRUST SWALLOWING
Three major problems are usually associated with abnormal forward tongue positioning—anterior open bite,

A

B

C
Figure 22-30 A, Anterior open bite caused by a thumbsucking habit. B, A Hawley-type reminder appliance was
constructed after other problems in the patient’s life were
recognized and treated. C, The occlusion 18 months after
the child had overcome the habit.

­ rotrusion of the incisors, and lisping. Proffit31 suggests
p
two major reasons for a relatively high prevalence of anterior tongue positioning in children, related to physiology
(maturation) and to anatomy (growth). Infants normally
position the tongue forward and down in the mouth at
rest and during swallowing to help establish an airway for
respiration. An infant’s swallow is characterized by strong
lip activity, placement of the tongue tip against the lower

Chapter 22

A

B

C

D

E

F

n

Managing the Developing Occlusion

441

Figure 22-31 A and B, Anterior open bite and palatal configuration in the mixed dentition associated with a thumb-sucking
habit. C, Bluegrass appliance with occlusal view of the appliance in place. D, Anterior view of the appliance in place. E, Frontal
view of appliance in place. F, Correction of the anterior open bite. (Courtesy Dr. John R. Mink.)

lip, and relaxation of the elevator muscles of the mandible. Physiologic transitions in swallowing patterns begin
during the first year of life as teeth erupt and continue
over the next several years as oral function matures. There
is a gradual activation of the elevator muscles of the mandible in swallowing so that a mature swallowing pattern
is characterized by relaxation of the lips, placement of the
tongue behind the maxillary incisors, and elevation of
the mandible until posterior teeth come into contact in
occlusion. This is usually observed before a child is 4 or 5
years of age.

An abnormal swallowing pattern prolonged into the
mixed and permanent dentitions is characterized by protrusion of the tongue between the anterior dentition, lack
of molar contact, and excessive circumoral muscle activity. Studies have shown the prevalence of tongue-thrust
to be much greater than the prevalence of anterior open
bite. Using cineradiography, Subtelny21,22 demonstrated
that tongue-thrust activity between the incisors with incomplete contact of the molars during swallowing occurs
in as many as 40% of adults with clinically acceptable occlusion. Fletcher32 reported that, in 1615 children from

442

Chapter 22

n

Managing the Developing Occlusion

ages 6 to 18 years, 52.3% of the 6- and 7-year-old children
thrust their tongue. The incidence rates were reduced to
34% at age 10 years, whereas almost 25% of the 16- to
18-year-olds showed tongue-thrust patterns. Hanson and
Cohen33 found a similar incidence and age distribution
of the tongue protruding between the teeth during swallowing. Despite these high numbers for tongue-thrust patterns, random samples of 8000 school-age children show
an overall open-bite incidence of 5.7 % in U.S. schoolchildren. African Americans have a much higher prevalence
than whites of an open bite greater than 2 mm (9.6% to
1.4%, respectively). From the data, it becomes obvious that
tongue thrust does not necessarily coincide with open-bite
malocclusion, and deviations from “normal” swallowing
are not necessarily detrimental to the occlusion.
Given the high percentages of tongue-thrust in children, the decreasing prevalence in older age groups, and
the lack of direct cause-and-effect relationships with
open-bite malocclusions, it seems reasonable to conclude
that most tongue-thrust patterns are normal transitional
occurrences. The adaptation to the more typical adult
swallowing pattern appears to be related to an increase
in the functional space for tongue activity during adolescent growth changes. The mandible follows skeletal
growth patterns that allow space for a downward and
backward accommodation of the tongue. Concurrently,
tonsillar and adenoid lymphoid tissue mass is reduced to
allow greater oropharyngeal air space. Vertical growth of
the dentoalveolar structures of the mandible and maxilla
contributes to an increase in oropharyngeal space that allows the tongue to assume a more posterior position as
the child proceeds through puberty.
Transition toward adult swallowing patterns appears
to be affected by a prolonged digit-sucking habit or by a
skeletal malocclusion in which anterior open bite or incisor protrusion exists between the dental arches (e.g., Class
II division 1). In these individuals, continued functional tongue protrusion during deglutition is viewed as an
adaptation that maintains the anterior open bite and is
not a primary etiological factor in causing the open bite.
Studies by Profitt34 and others have shown that there is
no “equal balance” of forces on the dentition produced
by the tongue vs. the lip musculature during functional
activity. The expansive forces of the tongue are significantly greater than and not balanced by the containing
forces of the lips. The shape of the dental arches and
position of the teeth do not appear to be overwhelmingly influenced by the horizontally directed pressures of
the lips and tongue during normal functional activities
such as swallowing and speaking. Profitt34 reported that
tongue pressures decrease as the size of the arch increases, patients with protruding incisors have fewer lingual
tongue pressures than do those with normal occlusion,
and when incisors are retracted, the tongue pressures increase to normal values. These findings are the reverse of
what would be expected if tongue pressure had pushed
the teeth into protruded positions. However, stronger relationships with the patient’s arch form and the resting
pressures of the tongue and lips have been found. An anteriorly positioned tongue “at rest” can impede vertical
eruption of the teeth and result in an open bite. This may

be reflected in the findings that most habit-related open
bites are self-correcting when digit sucking is eliminated
and tongue positioning is controlled.
The controversy concerning tongue-thrust swallowing extends into treatment approaches that include
palatal crib-type appliances, full orthodontic therapy,
myofunctional therapy, or combinations of the above.
­
The occurrence of an open bite is often initially related to
a thumb- or finger-sucking habit and then retained by the
tongue being thrust forward or the tongue merely occupying the space. In appliance therapy for digit-sucking habits, a vertical crib “fence” helps modify forward tongue
positioning associated with the anterior open bite. With
stoppage of the habit, the tongue assumes more normal
swallowing patterns as muscular functions reflect adaptation to the corrected anterior open bite. But what about
the child who presents with an anterior open bite and
does not have a history of a digit-sucking habit? Will this
child benefit from a palatal crib appliance to restrain the
tongue? Or should other approaches be taken in managing the open bite? The answer lies in understanding our
previous discussion on normal swallowing patterns and
the implications of tongue-thrust to occlusion. In the
school-age child without a documented digit-sucking
habit, palatal crib therapy directed specifically toward
tongue-thrust swallowing as a “causative” factor seems
questionable. This is based on the reasoning that, without
a documented extraoral habit, the most likely causative
factors would be either a significant airway obstruction
with habitual mouth breathing or a skeletal open-bite pattern. Both of these situations require a much more comprehensive approach than simple interceptive appliance
therapy. In fact, placement of a tongue-restricting palatal
crib appliance could exacerbate airway problems by forcing the child to keep the mandible open to accommodate
the appliance. The palatal crib design could actually make
things worse. The same applies to a skeletal open bite with
the usual implications of a vertical growth pattern. In addition, the variability of normal swallowing patterns in
relation to malocclusion, coupled with the spontaneous
improvement in tongue-thrusting patterns and anterior
open bite that is evidenced in 80% of children by the age
of 12 years, argues against tongue-thrust-directed therapy
as a stand-alone treatment for open bite.
Myofunctional therapy is the conscious retraining of
the tongue and strengthening of the lip muscles through
a specially designed exercise program. Promoted with
the expectation that training muscles to function properly will reduce abnormal pressures, successive steps in
the training program include acquainting the patient
with the abnormal swallowing pattern, teaching the correct pattern of swallowing using various exercises, and
reinforcing the correct patterns. Training exercises involve proper tongue-tip placement against the roof of
the mouth and not between the teeth, masseter muscle
isometrics to ensure swallowing with the molar teeth in
contact, and lip exercises to correct mentalis and facial
muscle activities. One technique has the patient practice
swallowing correctly 20 times before each meal. Holding a glass of water in one hand and facing a mirror, the
child takes a sip of water, closes the teeth into occlusion,

Chapter 22

A

B

n

Managing the Developing Occlusion

443

usually programmed to take 7 to 10 weeks of exercises
until the oral environment is stabilized. Most therapists
prefer to wait until the child is about 9 years of age before beginning treatment because normal developmental
changes occurring around this same time allow for more
favorable positioning of the tongue. After the patient has
trained the tongue and muscles to function properly during swallowing, an acrylic palatal retainer with a “fence”
may be constructed as a reminder to position the tongue
properly during swallowing (Fig. 22-32).
In patients with tongue-thrust swallowing and a
speech problem, referral to a speech therapist is the most
appropriate course of action. If a malocclusion is also
present, the coordinated use of myofunctional therapy by
the speech therapist and orthodontic treatment may be
undertaken to take advantage of each service. Generally,
any therapy aimed at altering the tongue positions during
swallowing and speech should be done in conjunction
with or after the orthodontic treatment rather than preceding it. If mouth-breathing postures are identified with
clinical symptoms of airway blockage, the dentist should
refer the child to an otolaryngologist for appropriate
medical consideration. Patients who are obligate mouth
breathers secondary to hypertrophic adenoid tissue or allergic conditions can have corresponding poor postural
relationships that can influence the developing skeletal
face. With proper diagnosis and management, the airway
interference may be reduced or eliminated to influence
occlusal development and orofacial musculature in a
positive direction. In patients with tongue-thrust alone
and no malocclusion, speech, or airway problems, there
is no reason to recommend any interceptive orthodontic
treatment.

ANTERIOR CROSSBITE IN PRIMARY
AND MIXED DENTITIONS

C
Figure 22-32 A, Anterior open bite resulting from a tonguethrust swallowing pattern. B, A removable retainer with
a crib-like component helped “retrain” the tongue from
being thrust forward during the swallowing process. C, The
tongue-thrust pattern has been overcome and the occlusion
is greatly improved.

places the tip of the tongue against the incisive papilla,
and swallows. This is repeated, followed each time by the
relaxation of the muscles until the swallowing progresses
smoothly. The use of a sugarless mint may also help in
muscle training. The child is instructed to use the tip of
the tongue to hold a mint against the roof of the mouth
until it melts. As the mint is held, saliva flows and makes
it necessary for the child to swallow. Treatments are

Dentoalveolar anterior crossbite represents a linguoversion of one or more maxillary anterior teeth with resultant “locking” behind the opposing mandibular teeth in
full closure (Fig. 22-33). The anterior crossbite is usually
an acquired malocclusion resulting from local etiological
factors (e.g., over-retained primary incisors) that interfere
with the normal eruptive positioning of the maxillary
anterior teeth. In some cases during closure movements,
premature contacts due to the lingual malpositioning
may result in a forward mandibular deviation to effect
full closure that “locks” the anterior segment in a crossbite posture involving multiple teeth. Such an acquired
muscular pattern is referred to as a pseudo-Class III malocclusion as the mandible shifts from Class I to Class III
relationships during closure (Fig. 22-34). In most cases
localized dentoalveolar anterior crossbites with or without mandibular displacement should be treated as soon
as they are discovered. Delayed treatment can lead to serious complications such as loss of arch dimensions and
asymmetric midlines, traumatic occlusion with stripping
of gingival tissue on the labial aspect of the lower tooth,
wear facets on involved incisors, and untoward growth
patterns if a functional shift is involved. Importantly,
at later developmental stages, not only does differential

444

Chapter 22

n

Managing the Developing Occlusion

Figure 22-33 Examples of dentoalveolar anterior crossbites with lingually locked maxillary central incisors. The malpositioning

with traumatic occlusion results in forward displacement of the lower incisor and stripping of the gingival tissues.

A

B

C

Figure 22-34 Lingually displaced central incisors may produce occlusal interference on closure that results in a functional anterior shift of the mandible (pseudo-Class III malocclusion). A, Maximum intercuspation after anterior shift of mandible. B, First
contact with edge-to-edge incisor interference. C, Maxillary incisors malpositioned lingual to arch form.

diagnosis become more difficult but also do the mechanics for correction become more complex with less predictable results. Simple appliance designs are usually adequate
to achieve correction of dentoalveolar anterior crossbites.
Diagnoses should be made with consideration of the following clinical findings.
  
1.	Number of teeth involved. Involvement of one or two incisors usually represents a dental crossbite, although the
chance of functional displacement is increased as more
teeth are involved. Suspicion of a skeletal malocclusion
grows in proportion to the number of teeth in crossbite.
2.	Inclinations of maxillary and mandibular incisors. Dentoalveolar and functional crossbites usually exhibit
lingual inclination of the maxillary incisors and
normal to slight labioversion of the lower incisors
in response to incisal interference. In a true skeletal
Class III malocclusion, lower incisors are retroclined,
whereas maxillary incisors usually exhibit normal to
proclined inclinations.
3.	Mandibular closure pattern and facial profile. In a
dentoalveolar crossbite, the facial profile and buccal
occlusion should present a neutroclusion at rest, first
contact, and full closure, with the soft tissues masking the dental malpositioning. Any displacement of
the mandible should be observable as a shift from
neutroclusion to Class III buccal patterns “worsens” a
normative profile at rest to an apparent prognathism
in full closure. If the child can readily bite to an edgeto-edge incisor position without directed jaw manipulation, evidence of a forward shift of the mandible is
confirmed. A Class III skeletal malocclusion should
close in a smooth pattern without anteroposterior
disruption. A mesiocclusion of molar positioning and
prognathism of the profile should persist at all times.

4.	Familial appearance. If similar dentofacial conditions
exist, the probability increases that the case involves a
skeletal problem that is genetic in origin rather than a
localized malocclusion.
5.	Cephalometric analysis. Assessment of lateral cephalograms can usually confirm impressions of the clinical
examination (see Chapter 21). Realizing that anterior
displacement may demonstrate cephalometric measurements indicating mandibular prognathism when
the cephalogram is obtained in full occlusion, the clinician should analyze centric relation cephalograms
or overlay analysis of rest position and full occlusal
tracings to determine true skeletal relationships. The
inclination patterns of the upper and lower incisors
are key factors in this assessment.
  
Diagnosed in the transitional dentition, dentoalveolar
anterior crossbites with or without mandibular displacement are usually approached from the viewpoint that
the primary discrepancy involves one or more maxillary
anterior teeth in linguoversion. Any labial inclination of
lower incisors is in response to the upper malpositioning.
This simplifies treatment, in that correction is directed toward labial movement of displaced maxillary incisors to
“jump” the bite. After normal maxillary incisor positions
are achieved, the proclination of lower incisors is usually
self-correcting with the establishment of normal overbite
and overjet. Studies have shown that gingival recession in
the lower anterior segment improves spontaneously after
crossbite correction. In most cases removal of the traumatic occlusion allows normal attachment levels to be
sustained without the need for specific periodontal treatment procedures. If it can be assumed that local etiologic
factors such as over-retained primary incisors have been
eliminated, one of several treatment methods may be

Chapter 22

selected. This is done after an evaluation of biomechanical decision factors such as the following:
  
1.	Incisor positioning and available space. If space is available, options can be directed toward simple labially
directed tipping movements of involved maxillary
incisors. This particularly applies if the root of the lingual tooth is in the same relative position as it would
occupy in normal occlusion. If space is not available
or with greater bodily tooth displacement, Edgewise
appliances may be required to create space and provide controlled orthodontic movements.
2.	Stage of eruption. If the displaced maxillary incisor
is in active eruption, the treatment may use simple
leveraging techniques to redirect the tooth forward
into acceptable position. If the tooth is fully erupted,
the forces of occlusion will usually not allow simple
leveraging of eruption paths. Directed forces to effect
labial repositioning of the involved maxillary anterior
teeth will be required.
3.	Degree of overbite. During treatment, occlusal bite
planes are often proposed to remove overbite interference during labial movement. Whereas this is desirable in the use of removable appliances and those
incorporating labial bracketing of involved teeth, the
3- to 4-mm freeway space at rest position and the use
of directed lingual applied forces from fixed appliances negate the need for bite-opening to achieve successful labial movement in most clinical situations.
Exceptions involve cases exhibiting more than 5 mm
of overbite extending beyond freeway space. The
overbite has greater impact on retention, in that positive overbite will maintain positioning of the incisors
once corrected.
  
In addition to these factors, cooperation of the patient
and parent and personal preference of the clinician are
considerations in treatment mechanics. Treatment approaches are of two general types: (1) passive incisal guides
that, during mandibular closure, redirect or “leverage”
maxillary anterior inclinations in a labial orientation; and
(2) active appliances that use directed orthodontic forces
to achieve labial repositioning of the maxillary anterior
teeth.

n

Managing the Developing Occlusion

445

A

B

TONGUE BLADE/POPSICLE STICK THERAPY
Cooperative children can often correct a localized anterior crossbite using the wedging effect of a tongue blade or
popsicle stick (Fig. 22-35). Teeth in initial eruption with
a minimal degree of locking can often be repositioned
within 24 to 72 hours. The child is instructed to place the
stick behind the locked tooth and, using the chin as a fulcrum, exerts pressure on the tooth in the labial direction.
The procedure is done in 15- to 30-minute increments at
a time for at least several hours of engagement. The obvious advantage of the technique is that “self-correction”
avoids the expense and time involved with appliance
therapy. The technique is highly dependent upon the frequency, duration, and accuracy with which the child uses
the leverage stick against an erupting incisor. While it is
still possible to correct an established crossbite with intense tongue blade therapy, the treatment is very unlikely
if the tooth is erupted into full crossbite.

C
Figure 22-35 A, Partially erupted central incisor with a
minimal degree of overbite and lingual locking. B, A tongue
blade was used to exert labially directed pressure on the
lingually locked incisor. C, Correction of the crossbite accomplished with the tongue blade.

446

Chapter 22

n

Managing the Developing Occlusion

LOWER INCLINED PLANE
An acrylic extension from the lower anterior teeth designed to engage the incisal edges of lingual displaced
maxillary teeth during closure applies pressure upon patient closure that will direct the engaged tooth labially
into normal bite position (Fig. 22-36). Prerequisites for an
inclined plane are adequate space in the maxillary arch,
a normal or excessive overbite, and sufficient mandibular
teeth for retention of the acrylic. The inclined plane is
constructed using self-curing resin on a working model to
enclose the lower canine-to-canine anterior segment. This
maximizes stability while preventing excessive lingual
movement of the lower incisors. The acrylic should engage only the upper tooth or teeth in crossbite and incorporate approximately a 45° incline to the long axis of the
lower incisors. The incline portion should extend about ¼
inch posteriorly such that the patient cannot readily bite
behind the inclined plane.
At placement, the inclined plane is tried in the child’s
mouth before cementation to ensure that only the locked
upper incisor is in contact with the acrylic and the plane
does not touch palatal tissue. The posterior “bite-­opening”
should be slightly beyond rest position (not more than 2
to 3 mm), to avoid excessive muscle fatigue. This biteopening limits the time the appliance can be worn because eruption of posterior teeth may occur within

2 weeks and a tendency to an anterior open bite may result. The physical activities of children with bite planes
should be restricted, to minimize the possibility of avulsion or luxation of the teeth that occlude on the plane
from a blow to the chin. Follow-up should be made at 1
week, with adequate bite-jumping usually achieved within this time. If not “jumped” after 1 week, the inclined
plane may be continued no more than an additional
week. The appliance design and upper spacing should be
evaluated for any interference to correction before the
therapy is continued. The inclined plane should not be
applied beyond this 2-week period due to the danger of
overeruption of the posterior teeth and opening of the
bite. If the situation is not corrected in this time, either
the original diagnosis may be in error or more controlled
mechanics are indicated. Once correction is achieved, the
appliance should be carefully removed to allow for final
positional adjustments with the natural vertical overlap
providing retention of the corrected positions.
The advantages of the inclined plane lie in ease of fabrication, simplicity of action, rapid correction time, and
possible use when there is insufficient eruption to engage active appliances. Disadvantages include discomfort
associated with forced bite-opening, poor aesthetics, limitations on diet, potential for gingival irritation, possibility of creating an open bite, and, of particular concern,

A

B

C

D

Figure 22-36 A, Essentially normal occlusion except for the central incisor crossbite. B, A lower cemented acrylic bite plane
was used to reposition the lingually locked incisor. C, The tooth has moved into correct position with sufficient overbite to
maintain the new relationship. D, Four years after the correction of the crossbite. Notice improvement in the appearance of
the tissue on the labial surface of the lower left central incisor.

Chapter 22

the risk of traumatic injury if the child hits his/her chin
while the inclined plane is positioned in the mouth. In
addition, the inclined plane may be dislodged by occlusal
stress and require recementation. Given these disadvantages and the availability of other options that are more
predictable and safer, the use of acrylic inclined planes
is generally to be avoided except when other options are
simply not feasible.

PALATAL-SPRING APPLIANCES (REMOVABLE
HAWLEY OR FIXED PALATAL WIRE)
A fixed or removable appliance incorporating palatal
springs provides the best option for dental anterior crossbites that are not amenable to tongue blade guidance.
Properly oriented springs exert targeted labially directed
pressures against the teeth from the palatal side and are
not affected by the reverse overjet. The major disadvan­
tages are technical: the finesse needed in engaging the
spring to the involved tooth or teeth, adjustments if breakage occurs, modification for retention if overbite is not adequate, and untoward movements. These disadvantages

n

Managing the Developing Occlusion

447

may be readily overcome with proper fabrication and
management of the appliance.
A removable Hawley-type retainer modified with auxiliary springs can reduce lingual displacement of maxillary
incisors, with correction usually achieved in 6 to 12 weeks
(Fig. 22-37). A conventional Hawley retainer incorporating a labial bow and Adams clasps on the molars provides
the base for the spring component. Although usually not
necessary, the use of full posterior occlusal coverage enhances the effectiveness of a removable approach by minimizing any overbite interference to labial movement.
Appliance action is enhanced if the appliance is seated
when teeth are in occlusion, to engage the finger-spring
more fully in counterbalancing the displacement effects
of spring engagement.
With a helical loop finger-spring of 0.020- or 0.022inch stainless steel wire, activation should represent 2 to
3 mm of helical loop closing from passive spring positioning that approximates the incisal edge of the contacted
tooth. When activated, the spring tends to slide along the
sloping lingual surface of the incisor to exaggerate tipping

A
B

C

E

D

F

Figure 22-37 Removable Hawley-type finger-spring appliance. A and B, Lingual locked permanent lateral incisor with retained

primary lateral incisor and insufficient space for the lateral to move forward. C, A removable Hawley-type appliance with
finger-spring designed to correct the condition. Note that the retained primary incisor was extracted and the mesial surface
of the primary canine was disked to allow space for tooth movement. Activation of the spring with engagement under the lingual composite “button” resulted in labial movement of the tooth. D, The corrected occlusion at the time the appliance was
discontinued. E and F, Same patient 3 years later without any intervening retention or other treatments. Bands have just been
placed in preparation for phase 2 braces.

448

Chapter 22

n

Managing the Developing Occlusion

effects. This problem can be overcome by the bonding
of a small “button” of flowable composite on the lingual
surface to create a retentive undercut for maintaining a
cervical orientation of the spring. This optimizes labial
movement with less tipping by orienting the force vector
closer to the center of rotation of the engaged tooth. The
composite should not interfere with vertical closure after
the malposed tooth is moved out of crossbite (i.e., not
placed too far incisally), while ensuring spring engagement by extending the mesiodistal width of the tooth.

FIXED TRANSPALATAL WIRES WITH SPRINGS
A transpalatal connector wire of 0.036- or 0.040-inch
stainless steel soldered to banded molars that incorporates a helical loop spring of 0.020-inch stainless steel
wire provides a very effective method to labialize maxillary incisors involved in anterior crossbite (Fig. 22-38).
The orientation of the spring essentially mirrors the procedures outlined for the removable Hawley appliance.
With the lingual composite button used to engage the
spring, the increased stability and rigidity of the fixed
anchorage system dramatically enhance directed forces
toward the center of rotation of the engaged incisors. The
fixed approach results in significantly less tooth-tipping
in offering a more bodily applied tooth movement and
provides continuous force application that is not dependent on the child’s cooperation. These factors combine
to effect correction of dental anterior crossbites by means
of a fixed-spring approach with average treatment times
ranging from 1 to 3 weeks.
Abutment support may be from either second primary molars or first permanent molars, depending on

developmental and eruptive status, condition of the
crown, and clinician choice. After bands are fitted to selected abutments and a working model is prepared, the
anchor wire is bent to approximate the palatal arch form
about 5 mm lingual to the anterior teeth in crossbite.
This positioning provides accurate space for bending a
compact double-helical loop spring as the active component. The maxillary incisors to be engaged should be
cut off horizontally on the working model at the cingulum level to create a “table” to position the spring
horizontally with proper length. Passively, the helical
loop extends from the anchor wire to rest on the cut-off
incisal table, with the free end of the spring at the labial
surface. The original positioning of the palatal anchor
wire about 5 mm behind the crossbite teeth provides
this distance in a double-helical design. Careful soldering of the spring to the palatal wire completes the appliance in preparation for polishing.

Labial Edgewise Archwires
Edgewise brackets and labial archwire mechanics are used
when multiple incisors are in crossbite, palatal displacement and rotations are severe, and adjacent tooth movements are needed to adjust anterior spacing. While the
clinician who wisely applies Edgewise techniques can
achieve greater control in tooth positioning, their use
presents major disadvantages in the early-mixed dentition, when most anterior crossbites are corrected. Disadvantages include increased chair time in placement,
­adjustment, and removal; need for special equipment and
supplies; increased soft-tissue irritation; decalcification of
teeth; risk of injury to developing teeth with excessive

A

B

C

D

Figure 22-38 Fixed palatal finger-spring appliance. A, Lingual locked permanent central incisor with significant overbite.
B, Fixed palatal appliance at delivery with double-helical loop finger-spring designed to labialize the single incisor. Initial activation of the spring from a passive position at the labial surface to engage the lingual composite “button” resulted in directed
movement of the tooth. C, The corrected occlusion at 17 days’ treatment time. D, The appearance of the spring at completion with the incisor out of crossbite. The lingual composite had been removed at 10 days’ treatment time to eliminate vertical
interference with positioning.

Chapter 22

n

Managing the Developing Occlusion

449

biomechanical movements; and the expectations and expenses associated with “braces.” Discussion of Edgewise
archwire techniques falls beyond the concepts of interceptive management and is illustrated in the section on
Comprehensive Orthodontics.
Finally, it is worth mentioning that an interesting
study by Rosa et al. showed 84% spontaneous correction
of anterior crossbites in conjunction with rapid palatal
expansion treatment in the mixed dentition.35 This occurred whether or not the patients had an existing posterior crossbite because all 50 patients studied exhibited
maxillary crowding but only 20 had a posterior crossbite.

POSTERIOR CROSSBITE IN PRIMARY
AND MIXED DENTITIONS
Before treatment, the type of posterior crossbites in children must be determined—whether the discrepancy is a
localized problem in tooth eruption (dental crossbite), a
gross basal disharmony between the maxilla and mandible (skeletal crossbite), or a transverse discrepancy in upper to lower arch width that produces a lateral shift of the
mandible on closure (functional crossbite).
Dental posterior crossbites involve atypical eruption
and alignment with localized displacement of individual
teeth into crossbite configurations. Most often involving
isolated permanent maxillary first molars or premolars,
dental crossbites are usually corrected in conjunction with
comprehensive Edgewise orthodontics. Within an interceptive context, isolated first permanent molar crossbites
can be corrected by the use of cross-arch elastics (Fig. 2239). A hook or button (either bonded to enamel or welded
onto bands) on the lingual surface of the upper molar and
the buccal surface of the lower molar is used to secure
elastics. The elastics should be changed by the child or
parent each day until the crossbite has been corrected.
Typically, a crossbite involving isolated first molars can
be corrected with cross-arch elastics in 4 to 8 weeks. If either of the opposing molars is in correct alignment before
treatment, an anchorage appliance (lower lingual arch or
upper Nance/Transpalatal Bar) may help prevent movement of that tooth. The corrected cuspal interdigitation
usually holds the teeth in their new relationship, so there
is no need for a retentive appliance.
Skeletal posterior crossbites present as gross discrepancies in basal relationships of the maxilla and mandible,
usually presenting a full bilateral crossbite with severe
constriction of the maxilla (Fig. 22-40). Midlines are generally coincident to the facial midline in occlusion, with
no functional deviations observed on closure. The skeletal dysplasia is often complicated by other factors such
as crowding of the maxillary teeth, anterior open bite,
and environmental factors that impede normal growth
patterns (e.g., severe airway problems, cleft palate). Kurol and Berglund36 found 4 of 86 crossbites in children, a
relatively low frequency, presenting as full bilateral crossbite. Modéer and associates37 reported a similar 2% incidence of bilateral crossbites in children.
Functional posterior crossbites involve a lateral shift of
the mandible during closure in response to transverse occlusal interference between the maxillary and mandibular

A

B

C
Figure 22-39 A, Buccal crossbite limited to the first permanent molars on the right side. B, Molar bands with hooks
and cross-arch elastics from lingual side of upper to buccal
side of lower are used to correct the crossbite. C, The crossbite has been corrected in a 4-week period.

450

Chapter 22

n

Managing the Developing Occlusion

A

B

C

D

E

F

Figure 22-40 An acrylic jack-

screw rapid palatal expander
(Haas RPE) in the mixed dentition with bands on the permanent first molars and bonded
composite on the primary
canines. A and B, The pretreatment bilateral posterior crossbite
with constricted and tapering
maxillary arch form. C and
D, The rapid palatal expansion appliance appearance at
cementation and after expansion
involving 32 turns on a once-aday schedule. E, The occlusion
at 3 months with the appliance
maintained for retention. F, The
occlusion 1 year after appliance
removal.

arch widths. The deviation of the mandible presents as
a unilateral crossbite in centric occlusion involving multiple posterior teeth on one side, normal buccolingual occlusion of the contralateral side, and a deviation of the
lower midline and chin toward the crossbite side (Figs.
22-41 and 22-42). While presenting a unilateral appearance in occlusion, functional posterior crossbites show
cusp-to-cusp transverse contacts bilaterally, with a constricted maxillary arch of insufficient width to enclose the
lower dentition at initial contact. Factors contributing to
constriction in maxillary width include upright primary
canine interference, thumb and finger habits, and mouthbreathing/airway problems. Studies demonstrate a direct
linear progression between prolonged digit and pacifier
habits beyond the age of 4 years and a higher incidence
of posterior crossbites.
Functional posterior crossbites are among the more
common occlusal problems observed in the primary and
mixed dentitions, with an incidence rate of 5% to 8% of
children. Lindner and Modéer,38 documenting patterns
in 76 children with primary dentition, reported that three
or more teeth (canines back) were involved in 85% of the
crossbites, with two thirds extended to include the primary lateral incisors. A lateral shift of the mandible was
seen in 97% of the children, resulting in a lower midline
discrepancy of about 2 mm on average. Other studies
support the impression that more than 90% of posterior
crossbites in children exhibit functional shifting of the

mandible on closure as a component of the crossbite pattern. As a result of the functional shift, dental, skeletal,
and neuromuscular adjustments likely result in further
constriction of the maxillary arch, maldistribution of
erupting teeth and alveolar bone, and asymmetric growth
of the contralateral sides. Kutin and Hawes,39 in a study
of 35 children with posterior crossbite in the primary dentition followed into the mixed dentition, reported that
32 of the children showed persistent crossbite of the first
permanent molars after their eruption. Other studies have
also suggested that posterior crossbites are generally not
self-correcting because consistent incidence rates have
been shown in children at 3, 6, 8, 10, and 12 years of age.
It appears that less than 10% of posterior crossbites present in the primary dentition self-correct into the mixed
dentition.
In conjunction with functional posterior crossbites,
asymmetric condylar positioning has been demonstrated
on tomograms and transcranial radiographs. Hesse and
colleagues40 documented condylar positioning using
temporomandibular joint tomograms in 22 functional
posterior crossbite patients corrected with maxillary expansion at a mean age of 8.5 years. The condyle on the
noncrossbite side was positioned more anteriorly before
treatment and moved posteriorly and superiorly after
treatment. The condylar position was similar at pretreatment and posttreatment stages on the crossbite side.
Importantly, correction of the crossbite with maxillary

Chapter 22

A

n

Managing the Developing Occlusion

451

B

D

C

E
Figure 22-41 W-arch appliance. A, Functional posterior crossbite in the primary dentition in maximum intercuspation occlusion. Crossbite extends through buccal segment from the lateral incisor with a 2.5-mm mandibular midline shift to the affected side. B, In rest to first contact position, the dental midlines are normal with the posterior segments edge-to-edge bilaterally
in transverse width. C, Soldered W-lingual arch appliance at cementation. D, The crossbite was corrected in 6 weeks with 2- to
3-mm overexpansion; the appliance was left in place for 3 months. Notice that the dental midlines are properly aligned with
the functional shift eliminated. E, Two years posttreatment, the transverse posterior widths are in proper relationship with no
mandibular shift evident during closure.

A

C

D

B
E
Figure 22-42 Quad-helix appliance. A, Functional posterior crossbite in the early transitional dentition in maximum intercuspation

occlusion. Crossbite extends through buccal segment with a 1.5-mm mandibular midline shift to the affected side. B, Soldered
quad-helix appliance at cementation. Note symmetric and horizontal loop design for optimum expansion with minimal buccal
tipping of molars. C, Occlusion 2 weeks after appliance removal. The crossbite was corrected in 4 weeks, and the appliance was left
in place for 2 months. Dental midlines are properly aligned with the functional shift eliminated. D, Six months posttreatment, the
transverse posterior widths remain in proper relationship with no mandibular shift evident during closure. E, Two years after treatment into mid-mixed dentition with proper transverse relationships and no functional shift of mandible noted.

452

Chapter 22

n

Managing the Developing Occlusion

expansion established symmetry of condylar relationships in all planes of space. Myers and associates41 similarly reported that joint spaces were asymmetric before
treatment of children with functional crossbite, and
correction led to symmetry of condylar joint spaces. Pirtiniemi and colleagues,42 comparing condylar path and
mandibular length in nine children with unilateral posterior crossbite treated with maxillary expansion between
the ages of 5 and 8 years with a group of 13 individuals
with untreated crossbites into young adulthood, reported that the condylar path evidenced asymmetry in both
treated and untreated individuals, with greater steepness
and condylar rotation on the crossbite side. The eminence
was flatter in both groups on the noncrossbite side, whereas mandibular length was shorter on the crossbite side.
The degree of mandibular asymmetric length was twice as
great in untreated children vs. those with treated posterior
crossbites. Other studies confirm that displacement of the
mandible in growing children produces asymmetric mandibular length, with the crossbite side shorter than the
noncrossbite side. The mandibular rotation also results
in a sagittal asymmetry of contralateral sides, with the
crossbite side expressing a more distal step–Class II relationship and the noncrossbite side a more Class I to Class
III pattern. Even though correction with maxillary expansion improves molar positioning toward Class I positions
on the crossbite side and reduces the midline discrepancy,
full establishment of symmetric relationships after correction is not a consistent finding. The continuation of some
degree of asymmetry after correction suggests that unbalanced growth occurred up to the time of correction, more
balanced symmetry of the growth patterns was expressed
after correction, and any acquired pretreatment morphological asymmetry remained after correction.
Early correction of posterior crossbites has been shown
to enhance developmental patterns by redirecting teeth
into more normal positions, correcting asymmetries of
condylar position, allowing for normal vertical closure
without functional deviations, making beneficial dentoskeletal changes during periods of dynamic growth,
and eliminating factors detrimental to dentofacial development. Early treatment also allows for simplified
approaches that are less complex, less time consuming,
and more physiologically tolerable to structural tissues
than are treatment demands in older patients. Delaying
correction until the permanent dentition requires more
complex mechanics to achieve basal arch corrections and
may necessitate surgical approaches to achieving maxillary expansion.

SELECTIVE EQUILIBRATION
Selective equilibration of deflective interference, usually the primary canines, may enhance differences between intercanine widths and offer some potential for
functional crossbite correction without appliances. The
equilibration involves selective reduction (i.e., slanting)
of the lingual aspects of the upper primary canines and
labial reduction of the lower primary canines. Selective
grinding, according to Lindner,43 is successful when the
maxillary intercanine width difference is larger than the
mandibular intercanine width by a positive 2 to 3 mm

before the selective grinding. When the upper-to-lower
intercanine width approximates the same width or the
lower is greater, selective grinding is not effective and upper canine expansion is required. In most full primary or
mixed-dentition cases, equilibration procedures alone are
insufficient to eliminate a functional discrepancy associated with a constricted maxillary dentoalveolar width.

MAXILLARY EXPANSION
Appliances used for maxillary expansion in the correction
of posterior crossbites include fixed palatal wire designs
(e.g., W-arch, quad-helix), fixed jackscrew expanders (e.g.,
Hyrax, Rapid Palatal Expander [RPE] of Haas), and removable split-acrylic plate appliances (e.g., Schwarz Plate).
Success rate for treatments during the primary and mixed
dentitions have been documented at greater than 90% for
the fixed approaches success rate and 70% for removable
appliances. Dimensional changes have documented that
early expansion techniques to correct posterior crossbites
in children require an average final overall increase of
about 3 to 4 mm in intramolar width and 2 to 3 mm of
intracanine width change for successful correction. The
clinical reports further indicate that expansion protocols,
regardless of the appliance used, should incorporate an
overexpansion of about 2 to 3 mm beyond these final desired increments during the active phase in order to accommodate settling adjustments after treatment.
Transverse expansion of the maxillary arch is directed
at a combination of dentoalveolar expansion and orthopedic separation of the midpalatal suture. It is considered
desirable to optimize the opening of the midpalatal suture in order to provide more stable basal arch expansion
than orthodontically oriented lateral expansion. In the
consideration of appliance options, the nature of orthodontic and orthopedic movements is closely related to
the rate of expansion, the magnitude of force application, and the patient’s developmental stage. Fixed palatal
jackscrew appliances, such as the RPE of Haas (see Fig.
22-40) and the Hyrax (Fig. 22-43), are applied bilaterally
to maxillary posterior teeth, with the midline screw generally expanded at a rate of one or two turns per day (one
turn equals 0.25 mm of screw widening) during an active
treatment time of 1 to 4 weeks. Single activations of fixed
jackscrews produce high magnitude forces in the 3- to
10-pound range that maximize orthopedic separation by
overwhelming suture tissues before substantial orthodontic movement can occur. The relative skeletal and dental
components produced by rapid palatal expansion have
been evaluated with standardized nonanatomic reference
points (e.g., implants) and frontal cephalograms. Krebs44
reported average arch width increases of 6 mm (range,
0.5 to 10.3 mm) for 23 individuals aged 8 to 19 years,
with a total dental arch increase twice that of the skeletal
segments. Analyzing the Krebs data, Hicks45 estimated
that skeletal separation accounted for ­approximately one
half of increased arch width in 8- to 12-year-olds and
about one third of the increase in 13- to 19-year-olds.
Three- to six-month retention periods involving fixed appliances (e.g., expanded appliance, transpalatal bar) are
recommended to allow for reorganization and stabilization of rapidly expanded maxillary sutures.

Chapter 22

A

n

Managing the Developing Occlusion

453

B

Figure 22-43 Hyrax appliance in

D
C

E

F

Compared with the jackscrew appliances, fixed palatal wire appliances (e.g., W-arch, quad-helix) accomplish
maxillary expansion following “low-force” and “slowexpansion” procedures. Thomas and colleagues46 determined that W-arch (see Fig. 22-41) and quad-helix (see
Fig. 22-42) designs with 6 to 8 mm of expansion produced
lateral forces in the range of 400 to 600 g (approximating
1 pound) at the molar positions and 200 to 300 g at the
canine level. Some degree of sutural separation has been
documented during the primary and mixed-dentition
stages with forces in these ranges. Using forces of less than
2 pounds to achieve maxillary arch width increases from
3.8 to 8.7 mm during treatment, Hicks estimated that
skeletal changes represented 24% to 30% of the total arch
width increase in 10- to 11-year-old children and 16% in
14- to 15-year-old patients. Although they did not document the relative ratios of orthopedic vs. orthodontic
change, Harberson and Myers47 reported radiographic evidence of suture opening during the deciduous and earlymixed dentition in 8 of 10 posterior crossbites successfully
corrected with a W-arch appliance. Bell and Lecompte48
reported suture separation on each of 10 children (mean
age, 6 years 9 months) by means of quad-helix appliances
with mean increases of maxillary intermolar width of +5.3
mm and maxillary intercanine width of +4.l mm in successfully correcting functional posterior crossbites. The
conceptual model of fixed palatal wire appliances in the

late-transitional dentition with
bands on the permanent first
molars and first premolars. A, The
Hyrax appliance at cementation.
B, The pretreatment bilateral
posterior crossbite with symmetric but constricted maxillary
arch form. C and D, Appliance
and occlusal appearance after
expansion involving 36 turns on
a once-a-day schedule. The large
midline diastema reflects orthopedic separation of the mid-palatal
suture. E and F, The occlusion
at 6 months postexpansion.
The Hyrax was maintained for 5
months, and then replaced with
the fixed transpalatal appliance
for ­retention.
primary and mixed dentitions is that favorable orthopedic
and orthodontic ratios of expansion are realized with less
disruption than with rapidly expanded sutures. Because of
the “physiologic” nature of the expansion, the integrity of
tissue elements is sustained to allow for enhanced stabilization of the changes, with retention periods of up to 3
months appearing adequate.
The palatal wire W-arch and quad-helix designs offer
the advantages of increased molar rotational ability, relative comfort, minimal effect on speech and deglutition,
reduced soft-tissue irritation, and removal of adjustment
responsibility from the patient-parent. Posterior crossbites
in the full primary dentition are usually treated with banding of the deciduous second molars at ages 4 to 5 years. In
the mixed-dentition period (i.e., ages 6 to 11 years), the
first permanent molars are generally banded for posterior
crossbite correction. During the active eruption stage of
the first permanent molars, from about 6 months before
emergence until opposing occlusion is established, maxillary expansion procedures should usually be delayed. The
first permanent molars may not be affected by expansion
of the deciduous dentition during this transitional stage
and may erupt into crossbite, thus requiring additional
treatment. Delaying expansion until the first permanent
molars are in occlusion results in no significant technical
problems related to treatment. The Hyrax jackscrew appliance becomes the priority choice for maxillary expansion

454

Chapter 22

n

Managing the Developing Occlusion

when gross discrepancies in basal relationships present as
full bilateral crossbites, when there is pronounced maxillary constriction with severe crowding of the maxillary
teeth, and when other factors suggest the use of a rapid
palatal expansion to exaggerate orthopedic over orthodontic movements. True bilateral posterior crossbites require twice as much incremental expansion as needed in
functional crossbites, bringing into play the greater increments achievable with fixed jackscrew appliances. Given
an increasing resistance to sutural separation, older patients with late mixed or young permanent dentition (i.e.,
10- to 16-year-olds) require higher force systems of rapid
palatal expanders. Additionally, the transitional status of
exfoliating primary and erupting permanent teeth in the
late mixed dentition may complicate anchorage options
in the use of palatal wire appliances. The Hyrax is used
until growth is complete (girls, 16 to 17 years; boys, 18 to
21 years), with sutural separation anticipated during the
earlier stages of this developmental period. After retention, regardless of whether jackscrew or palatal wire-type
appliances were used in treatment, the laterally tipped
dental elements will upright. This dental relapse must be
factored into the active expansion and retention phases.
The soldered W-arch uses a 0.036- or 0.040-inch stainless steel wire contoured to the arch from bands on the
most distal teeth involved in the crossbite. The wire is
expanded to the bilateral width of the central fossae of
the banded molars before cementation, such that the
appliance must be compressed 2 to 3 mm bilaterally for
placement on the banded teeth. It is reactivated by being
removed for additional adjustment every 3 or 4 weeks if
necessary until the crossbite has been corrected (see Fig.
22-41). The appliance may be used as a retainer for 3 to
6 months after active treatment. The soldered W-arch is
very stable, with its primary use in situations that require
4 to 5 mm of maxillary buccal expansion such as typically
required in functional posterior crossbites. Some palatal
expansion may occur with the W-arch.
The quad-helix appliance, by incorporating four helical
loops into the W-arch design, provides refined adjustment
capability for a longer range of force application (see Fig.
22-42). For that reason, quad-helix treatment is emphasized, although the basic W-arch design follows similar
protocols. The quad-helix is fabricated from 0.036-inch
stainless steel wire with the loops equal in size to optimize
symmetric expansion and the “cosmetic” look of the appliance. The anterior loops should be at the level of the
canines and approximate the palatal width to minimize
the space between the crossbar and the palatal contour.
All loops should be as horizontal as possible, with the anterior loops circling toward the palate at the level of the
primary canines and the posterior loops away from the
palate. This places the helical loop section and the lateral
expansion forces in a more palatal position for enhanced
expansion effects. The posterior loops should extend approximately 2 to 3 mm distal to the molar bands for enhanced molar rotation and expansion.
The progress of expansion is followed as described for
the W-arch appliance, with a 2- to 3-week appointments
interval. Adjustments are made only when progress between successive appointments is static and the amount

of increased arch width is inadequate. Expansion is considered adequate when the occlusal aspect of the maxillary
lingual cusps comes into contact with the occlusal slope
of the mandibular buccal cusps in representing approximately 2 to 3 mm of overexpansion to compensate for
later uprighting of laterally tipped teeth once appliances
are removed. Successful expansion with slight overcorrection is usually achieved in 4 to 6 weeks. If an adjustment
is necessary, the appliance should be removed for activations to ensure appropriate expansion increments in both
amount and location. Activations consist of, again, opening with finger “accordion”-type action or incorporating
strategic bends along the wire-lengths to increase lateral
expansion. Bends can be done intraorally but tend to create compensating adjustments such that multiple intraoral activations frequently produce untoward movements.
The appliance is left in the expanded position to serve as a
retainer with a recommended minimum retention period
of at least 3 months. Longer periods are suggested if the
patient has a history of oral habits (e.g., thumb-sucking,
mouth breathing, tongue-thrusting) or exhibits continued
functional inconsistencies in mandibular closure. While
using the appliance as its own retainer is convenient, the
possibility of continued expansion into buccal crossbite
must be realized. Thus supervision during “retention”
with a monthly monitoring schedule is desirable. Heatannealing of the appliance may also be considered, or the
clinician may use a follow-up Hawley-type retainer.
Fixed Hyrax jackscrews are preferred for bilateral posterior crossbites with pronounced maxillary constriction
that require 6 to 8 mm of expansion to correct the transverse discrepancy, and in older patients in whom sutural
integrity requires greater force magnitudes to achieve basal
arch changes (see Fig. 22-43). Expansion effects with the
Hyrax appliance are closely related to the rigidity of the appliance, positioning of the jackscrew relative to the palatal
arch form, and resistance of the maxillary complex. Banded designs reinforced with buccal and lingual connector
wires between multiple abutments demonstrate the most
rigidity in design. If such a design is used in the mixed
dentition, the first permanent molars and second primary
molars provide excellent anchorage for the appliance. In
the adolescent dentition, anchorage usually involves first
permanent molars and either first or second premolars.
These appliances have been shown to generate the greatest
orthopedic response when positioned high in the palatal
contour and as far posteriorly toward molar positions as
possible. Given the force levels generated, an activation
rate of one turn per day is advised to achieve expansion on
the order of 6 to 8 mm (24 to 32 turns) during an active
treatment time approximating 1 month. After sufficient
expansion is obtained, the appliance is left in place for 6
months to allow for reorganization of the expanded suture
and enhanced stability of the arch width achieved.

ERUPTION PROBLEMS AND ERUPTION
“GUIDANCE”
Abnormal eruption patterns with resultant ectopic displacement, asymmetry of alignment, disruption in arch
integrity, and crowding are all benchmarks of a tooth

Chapter 22

n

Managing the Developing Occlusion

455

size–arch size discrepancy. In addition, local factors such
as supernumerary teeth, congenital absence or malformation of permanent successors, necrosis or dystrophic
calcification of a primary tooth secondary to trauma or
caries, and ankylosis of primary molars may present barriers to normal eruption and alignment. The watchword
for evaluation should be in monitoring the sequence and
symmetry of eruption patterns, with a basic rule that the
transition should be about the same for contralateral segments.

ECTOPIC ERUPTION OF FIRST PERMANENT
MOLARS
First permanent molars may be positioned too far mesially
in their eruption path, with resultant ectopic resorption
of the distal root of the second primary molar. Bjerklin
and Kurol49 distinguished two types of ectopic eruption—
reversible and irreversible. In the reversible type, the molar frees itself from the ectopic position and erupts into
normal alignment, with the second primary molar remaining in position (Fig. 22-44). Most permanent molars
in children with reversible patterns had freed themselves
by 7 years of age. In the irreversible type, the maxillary
first molar remains unerupted and in contact with the
cervical root area of the second primary molar (Fig. 2245). By the ages of 7 and 8 years, any ectopic eruption of
a permanent first molar should be considered irreversibly
locked. Young50 observed that ectopic eruption of first
permanent molars occurred 52 times in 1619 children
(3%), with the problem seen more frequently in boys (33
times) than in girls (19 times). The ectopic molar often
occurred in more than one quadrant and was most often
observed in the maxilla (only two ectopic lower first molars were noted). Young further observed that two thirds
of ectopic molars erupted into their essentially normal
positions without corrective treatment (reversible). Bjerklin and Kurol also reported that children with irreversible
ectopic eruption patterns had significantly larger permanent first molars, a more pronounced mesial angle path
of eruption, and a tendency toward a shorter maxilla in
relation to the cranial base. No significant differences in
these variables were found between sides with reversible
ectopic eruption and sides with normal eruption. Ectopic
molars also show a significant familial tendency, with a
prevalence of 19.8% in affected siblings vs. the overall 2%
to 3% general occurrence. A frequent occurrence rate of
ectopic first permanent molars at 25% in children with
cleft lip and cleft palate again implicates maxillary positioning and basal arch size as etiologic factors.
Irreversible ectopic molars that remain locked, if untreated, can lead to premature loss of the primary second
molar with a resultant decrease in quadrant arch length,
asymmetric shifting of the upper first molar toward Class
II positioning, and supraeruption of the opposing molar
with distortion of the lower curve of Spee and potential
occlusal interference. Early assessment with intraoral or
panoramic films approximating the timing of first permanent molar eruption is thus critical to identification of
the problem and provides an opportunity to intercept potential sequelae. If the problem is detected at 5 to 6 years
of age, an observation approach of “watchful waiting”

A

B

C
Figure 22-44 A, Ectopic eruption of a maxillary first permanent molar with evidence of resorption of the distal
buccal tooth of the second primary molar. B and C, Subsequent radiographs show continued resorption of the
primary molar, but “self-corrective” eruptive positioning
of the first permanent molar. Approximately two thirds of
ectopic molars are reported to exhibit such a “reversible”
pattern.

456

Chapter 22

n

Managing the Developing Occlusion

A

B

C

D

Figure 22-45 A and B, Periapical radiographs demonstrating bilateral ectopic eruption of maxillary first permanent
molars with resorption of the distal aspect of the second
primary molars. C and D, Subsequent radiographs obtained
at 6-month recall showing “irreversible” pattern of ectopic
eruption with continued resorption of the primary molars
and greater mesial displacement of the first permanent
molars.

with appropriate monitoring may be indicated, given
the two-thirds potential for self-correction. With self-correction being unlikely as the child approaches 7 years of
age, continued “locking” of the first molar with advanced
resorption of the primary second molar usually warrants
intervention. Another timing clue is that when the opposing molar reaches the level of the lower occlusal plane,
intervention is indicated to establish proper vertical control and prevent supraeruption. Because the anomaly often occurs bilaterally in conjunction with a tooth mass
discrepancy, the finding should result in careful examination of other areas for similar conditions.
Interceptive correction involves guidance of the ectopic molar into normal position, retention of a favorable eruption sequence, and maintenance of arch length.
Importantly, the resorptive process of the primary molar
generally stops once the ectopic positioning is corrected
and the tooth remains to stabilize arch integrity. One option is to restore the second primary molar with pulpotomy and a stainless steel crown supplemented with
band material extending subgingivally to rest mesially to
the ectopic molar. Designed to serve as a guide for eruption positioning, the extension must be carefully placed
so as not to exaggerate molar entrapment. The technique
seems simple but is actually very difficult to do and should
generally be avoided. Several other corrective procedures
have been reported, with treatments varied by the extent
of blockage, degree of primary tooth resorption, direction
of displacement, timing, arch length status, and patient
cooperation. Approaches include separators and distalizing appliances.
Orthodontic elastic separators are the first choice if
access is sufficient to allow insertion for engagement in
the contact areas of entrapment. The first placement is
the most difficult and often requires a modified separator and floss engagement. This is done by looping floss

through the separator, passing the floss through the contact area, pulling the doubled separator into the cervical
area of contact, and then pulling one side of the separator through the contact with the floss. Progressive use
of larger separators placed conventionally—from smaller,
“stretchier” elastic types to more rigid plastic types—at
subsequent visits facilitates this approach. Replacement
at 1- to 2-week intervals usually accomplishes correction
within 2 months. Separating springs can also be used provided sufficient eruption for insertion between the contact areas. However, separating springs tend to impinge
upon tissues and are easily displaced, raising concerns for
swallowing or aspiration. If springs are used, insertion
is most easily achieved by the use of How or Weingart
pliers to grasp the active arm of the spring. Floss looped
through the helix serves as a safety device if the spring
slips out of the pliers. The head of the spring is placed on
the marginal ridge, while the active arm is directed below
the contact point of the teeth. The spring may be inserted
from the buccal or lingual side (whichever provides the
greater access); the buccal approach is usually easier. The
spring is left in place until the tooth is freed from contact with the adjacent tooth and is erupting. The patient
should be seen every 2 to 3 weeks for evaluation of eruption progress and reactivation of the spring.
Brass ligature wire threaded between the contact areas of the affected teeth may facilitate distal movement
of the permanent molar through periodic tightening of
the looped wire as a separating force. The wire should be
twisted or a new one placed at approximately 3- to 5-day
intervals until the desired separation is achieved. Brass
wire usage is uncomfortable and local anesthetic is often
required; the brass wire usually has to be replaced one or
more times before correction is achieved, relapses easily,
and, in essence, is vastly overrated. Treatment with any
of the separator techniques requires that only a minimal
lock be evidenced and that minimal resorption of the
primary second molar has occurred. Of the three, elastic separators are much easier to use and are much less
problematic for minimal locks than are either separating
springs or brass wire.
Irreversible ectopic eruptions may require the use of
distally directed forces from the second primary molars
to disengage and allow eruption of the first permanent
molar. The Humphrey appliance uses a distally directed
S-shaped loop that is actively engaged on the occlusal
surface of the ectopically erupting permanent molar (Fig.
22-46). In original usage, it was often necessary to remove
the appliance for activations of the loop, and a restoration was required in the first molar after correction. The
advantages were stability and ability for severe locks of
the 6-year molar to be corrected. Subsequent modifications to the original Humphrey design include the use
of helical springs (0.018- to 0.022-inch wire) to provide
more continual force and easier reactivations, added stability by the anchoring of banded molars bilaterally with
a palatal wire, using springs from buccal and lingual aspects to minimize rotations of the permanent molar, and
using bonded composite resins to engage the distalizing
springs. Problems in activation and adjustment of the
spring, possible occlusal interference distorting the wire,

Chapter 22

A

n

Managing the Developing Occlusion

457

B

C
D
Figure 22-46 Distalizing spring (Humphrey) appliance. A, Bilateral ectopic eruption of the maxillary first permanent molars.

B, A Humphrey-type banded appliance with distalizing springs has been fabricated to reposition the ectopic first permanent
molar. The ectopic molars were uncovered at the time of band fitting. At placement, composite ridges were bonded to the
occlusal surfaces for spring engagement. C and D, After distal repositioning of the first permanent molar was achieved, the
appliance was removed, springs were cut off, and band material was tach-welded to provide extensions to maintain first permanent molar eruption into favorable positions.

C
A

D

B

E

Figure 22-47 Fixed maxillary Halterman appliance. A, Bands on second primary molars with distal engagement arms for

engaging elastomeric chains to bonded attachments on bilateral ectopic first permanent molars. B, The first permanent molar
has erupted into a favorable position after 6 weeks’ treatment time. Radiographs showing distal repositioning of the first permanent molar from pretreatment (C), at 2 weeks of treatment (D), to 1 year posttreatment (E).

need for access to the occlusal surface of the first permanent molar, and possible reciprocal movement of primary
molars are all disadvantages. Once distalized, the spring
needs to be removed to allow for vertical eruption of the
molar to ensure correction. To prevent relapse of the molar into the undermined area, band extensions are tackwelded to the distal aspect of the band and the appliance
is recemented.

The Halterman appliance uses elastomeric chains rather than springs as the distalizing force (Fig. 22-47). With
a rigid 0.036-inch stainless steel wire “hook” extended
distally from the lingual aspect of bands on the second
primary molars, stretching of elastomeric chains from
bonded buttons on the ectopic molar essentially “slingshots” the molar distally. Extending the wire from the lingual side of the primary molar avoids wire impingement

458

Chapter 22

n

Managing the Developing Occlusion

with the anterior border of the ramus during opening.
The wire should approximate the palatal contour with
the hook positioned horizontally to approximate the
buccolingual midpoint of the desired molar location and
about 5 mm beyond the distal marginal ridge of the involved permanent molar. This position provides adequate
stretch of the elastic forces in a vertical and parallel orientation to normal arch alignment. An occlusal button,
cleat, or bracket is bonded to the central fossae area of
the ectopic first molar as far mesially as accessible. Clinician-preferred (i.e., self- or light-cured) resin bonding is
used with success, depending on avoidance of moisture
contamination. Hybrid glass-ionomer cements that allow
moisture exposure and do not require acid-etching are an
alternative if isolation is compromised. In placement, the
elastomeric chain should already be secured to the button during the bonding process to ensure that composite
material does not extend into undercut areas and block
elastic engagement. After the button is bonded, the appliance is cemented and the elastomeric chain is stretched
to the distal hook. A closed-loop chain is recommended
for enhanced force application. Being relatively simple to
apply as well as predictable and effective, the Halterman
distalizing technique is currently the preferred method
when elastic separators are not applicable.

ERUPTION GUIDANCE IN THE LOWER INCISOR
SEGMENT
Developmental patterns often find permanent lower incisors erupting into a lingual position behind the primary
incisors as a “double row” of teeth. The majority of these
cases self-correct via eventual exfoliation; however, if the
problem does not self-correct by age 8 years, extraction of
the primary incisors may be necessary (see Chapter 19).
The tongue usually positions the permanent incisor forward into normal alignment. In conjunction with eruption of lower lateral incisors, there is a normative increase
in lower intercanine width of 2 to 3 mm (range, 0 to 5
mm). This “growth” in lower anterior space helps compensate for the inherent tooth mass liability. After the
lower permanent incisor transition is complete, by 7 to
8 years of age, the “normative” finding presents almost 2
mm of incisor crowding. Studies document that no future
increase in lower intercanine width for relief of crowding
will occur after this stage of incisor eruption is complete.
However, extra space is available within the overall arch,
as represented by the size difference between the primary
canines and primary molars vs. the permanent canines
and premolars. This “leeway space” represents a +1.7 mm,
on average, in each lower quadrant and provides potential for the relief of lower incisor crowding. Gianelly,11
reporting on 100 consecutive mixed-dentition children
presenting for orthodontic needs, found that 85 of them
had lower incisor crowding, with an average crowding discrepancy of −4.4 mm, a discrepancy significantly
greater than population averages of approximately 2 mm.
When leeway space was calculated into a space analysis,
adequate room to accommodate an aligned dentition was
indicated in 72% of the individuals with crowding. Given
this potential, if an overall space analysis indicates that a
child’s arch perimeter is adequate to accommodate or be

within 2 to 3 mm of relieving any incisor malalignment,
the clinician should consider options to facilitate adjustments through guidance of eruption and timely use of the
available leeway space.
A first option when incisor crowding is less than 3
to 4 mm involves “disking” the primary canines on
their mesiolingual surfaces. Timely disking provides a
“sluice-way” for lingual displaced incisors to slide forward toward the anterior arch form under the muscular
pressure of the tongue (Fig. 22-48). Bilateral disking can
provide up to 2 to 3 mm of space for “unraveling” of
lingually displaced incisors. With proper slicing of the
mesiolingual corner at the gingival contact area, there
is actually no measurable encroachment on overall leeway space in the individual quadrant. Movement of
the incisors under tongue pressure potentially increases
midline arch length and overall arch circumference as
the arch is rounded out in a forward direction. In the
case of labial malpositioned incisors, while disking may
provide additional room for alignment, the lips are a
more significant factor in the balance between muscular forces. The result is lingual flattening of the anterior
segment and a decrease in overall arch space. Disking
must involve slicing the canine subgingivally to completely free the contact area. Disking just the crown is
not enough. The use of a tapered bur of a size to allow
access without injury to adjacent permanent teeth is required (#699 or #169). Local anesthesia or nitrous oxide
support is frequently required because dentin exposure
and periodontal insult are necessary to disk primary canines adequately. Placement of a wedge is sometimes
necessary to protect the lateral incisor. Timing is critical to allow for optimal tooth positioning and ease of
access. Given normative intercanine width increases
of 2 to 3 mm during lateral incisor eruption, disking
should be delayed until eruptive “wedging” effects of
the incisors are realized. If indicated, disking of lower
primary canines is therefore recommended at around
7 to 8 years of age, near completion of lateral incisor
eruption.
While excessive incisor liability may result in ectopic loss of lower primary canines (reviewed earlier in
this chapter), more often the primary canines remain
and the permanent incisors erupt significantly malpositioned. If disking of the canines is not an option due
to the level of crowding or positioning of the incisors,
elective extraction of the primary canines to maintain
arch symmetry, coincident midlines, and incisor integrity may be considered (Fig. 22-49). Such intervention
becomes more viable when the incisor liability and
crowding are greater than 4 mm in the anterior segment. However, the clinician must remember that early
loss of lower primary canines will likely result in significant lower arch collapse. Therefore the extraction of
primary canines should not be undertaken without parental understanding of the consequences and, ideally,
orthodontic consultation. Given the long-term implications, such intervention goes beyond a first step in
guidance of eruption and actually represents the start
of either a phased early treatment program or a serial
extraction program.

Chapter 22

A

B

C

D

n

Managing the Developing Occlusion

459

Figure 22-48 Incisor guidance with disking of lower primary canines. A and B, Presentation of approximately 4.5 mm of lower

incisor crowding with lingual malpositioning of lateral incisors, retained lower left primary lateral, and 80% overbite. Given
significant overbite and positioning of incisors, the decision was made to disk the lower primary canines bilaterally in conjunction with restorative appointments. C, Same patient at 6-month recall appointment after disking. Slight additional disking of
canines was done at recall. D, Same patient at 1 year from start of first disking. Arch form is established as tongue pressure
positioned the lingually displaced incisors forward into the spaces created by disking.

A

B

Figure 22-49 Elective extraction of lower primary canines. A, Significant lower incisor crowding and malpositioning evidenced

by advanced lower right primary canine resorption with ectopic positioning of adjacent lateral incisor, lower dental shifting
toward right, and retained lower left primary lateral. Due to imminent loss of the lower right canine and malpositioning, a
decision was made to extract the primary canines bilaterally. B, Same patient 1 year later with symmetry and integrity of lower
incisor alignment. Patient is on course for either serial extraction protocol or setup for arch development, depending upon
other variables.

ERUPTION GUIDANCE IN THE MANDIBULAR
CANINE AND PREMOLAR SEGMENT
For a child between 10 and 12 years of age, radiographic
evaluation of the buccal segments provides particular
consideration in eruption guidance relative to primary
resorption patterns, eruption sequencing, molar adjustments to achieve Class I relationships, and usage of leeway space. Because the lower canine and first premolar
often erupt nearly concurrently and are larger than their
primary predecessors, they often take a mesial eruption
path, with the canine overlapping the lateral incisors. To
minimize such malpositioning, their timely transition
along with concurrent disking of the mesial surface of the

second primary molar may provide up to 2 to 3 mm of
space for their distal positioning (Fig. 22-50). The second
premolars usually erupt about a year later, frequently taking a path of eruption along the distal root of the second
primary molar. Extraction of the second primary molar
is sometimes indicated to allow for normal eruption of
the second premolar if such an atypical pattern is noted.
In addition to assessing eruption of the second premolars, the clinician should consider placement of a lingual
holding arch concurrent with removal or exfoliation of
the second primary molars (see Fig. 22-18). If the available buccal segment space is tight, the optimal use of leeway space for crowding is desirable, and/or the second

460

Chapter 22

n

Managing the Developing Occlusion

­permanent molars are erupting before the second premolars, the lingual arch may be a critical element in controlling overall arch dimensions.
Treatment-based articles have documented positive alignment effects in the use of passive lingual holding arches for
control of leeway space when used in the late mixed dentition. DeBaets and Chiarini51 reported on arch changes in 39
mixed-dentition cases with lower anterior crowding treated
with passive lingual arch therapy and selected removal of
primary molars over a 4-year period as compared with arch
changes in a matched group of 60 untreated children with
similar crowding. In untreated children, lower canine and
premolar mesial displacement occurred, with overlap of
already crowded lower incisors. In contrast, children with
lingual arches showed an average decrease in lower anterior
crowding of 3 to 4 mm by the time of second permanent
molar eruption. The permanent canines and premolars
erupted with an average of 1.5 mm more distal positioning
per side in children with lingual arches than in control children. Dugoni and associates52 published similar findings in
25 mixed-dentition patients with reductions in lower incisor crowding of greater than 3 mm after placement of passive lingual arches and selected primary molar extractions.
After an average postretention period of 10 years, 19 of the
25 patients continued to show clinically satisfactory lower
anterior alignment. When compared with 10-year follow-up
studies of orthodontically aligned patients, these results suggest that stability of the alignment with lingual arch therapy
was greater than or at least equal to that of active orthodontic treatments. Reballato et al.,53 using cephalograms, study
models, and tomograms of the mandibular body, reported
dimensional changes in 14 mixed-dentition patients with

incisor crowding of 3 mm or more who were treated with
passive lingual arches in comparison with 16 untreated control individuals. In lingual arch patients, arch length did not
measurably change through eruption of the succedaneous
teeth, compared with an average arch length decrease of
2.5 mm per side in the untreated control individuals. Archlength changes were related to first molars moving forward
+1.7 mm in the control group compared with only +0.3 mm
in the lingual arch group. Concurrently, incisors tipped forward slightly in the lingual arch group (+0.4 mm), whereas
uprighting of incisors in the controls reduced arch length
0.65 mm. In sum, the lingual arch reduced mesial molar
migration and incisor lingual movement in controlling
arch length, with concurrent relief of 3 to 4 mm of lower
incisor crowding in the treatment population. Brennan and
Gianelly54 quantified dimensional changes in 107 consecutive mixed-dentition patients treated with passive lingual
arches through eruption of all succedaneous teeth, with
occasional extraction of second primary molars being the
only other intervention. Arch length decreased an average
of 0.4 mm, whereas width increased slightly in lingual arch
patients. The resultant average +4.4 mm of total available
leeway space produced an average decrease in lower incisor
crowding from a pretreatment of −4.8 mm to +0.2 mm of
space after treatment. The space adjustments were enough
to resolve incisor crowding completely in 65 individuals
(roughly 60%). An additional 16 individuals (1 in 6) had a
final discrepancy of less than 1 mm, and 13 (1 in 10) had a
final discrepancy of less than 2 mm. Only 14 patients (13%)
had crowding greater than 2 mm after full buccal segment
eruption was complete. Of note, the majority of patients
with higher levels of postlingual arch crowding presented

A

B

C

D

Figure 22-50 Eruption guidance with sequential disking and selective extraction of primary teeth. A, Pretreatment alignment
with mesial eruption path of permanent canines to overlap incisors. B, Alignment at 5 months after elective extraction of
primary first molars and disking of the mesial surfaces of the second primary molars. C, Permanent canines and first premolars
have erupted in distal orientation with reduction in anterior crowding. D, After eruption of second premolars, good arch form
is established, with overall adequate space and easily correctible minor rotations.

Chapter 22

with initial ectopic loss of the lower primary canines. In
sum, a passive lingual arch with selected removal of primary
teeth provided adequate space and eruption guidance to relieve significant lower incisor crowding in 105 of the 107
individuals.
These studies consistently confirmed that arch length
remains relatively constant or decreases minimally in
patients treated with a passive lingual arch by reducing
forward movement of molars and lingual movement of
lower incisors. Timely treatment not only maintains arch
length, but also allows for distal eruptive positioning of
canines and premolars as a positive influence on relief
of mixed-dentition crowding in the 2- to 4-mm range,
enough to relieve lower crowding in about two thirds to
three fourths of patients.

ERUPTION GUIDANCE IN THE MAXILLARY
CANINE AND PREMOLAR SEGMENT
In the 7- to 8-year-old child, maxillary permanent canine
positioning approximates the distal aspect of the root of the
lateral incisor. This is associated with a normative distal tipping of the lateral incisor crowns under the fulcrum pressure
of the canine at the lateral root area. The maxillary canine
then normally deflects with a more vertical positioning toward the primary canine root area as eruption continues,
with a concurrent more labial orientation of the canine. This
labial orientation can be noted clinically by bulging in the
vestibular aspect of the alveolar process. As resorption of the
primary canine proceeds in normal patterns, the adjacent
maxillary lateral incisor crown should tip mesially as vertical eruption of the permanent canine continues down the
primary canine root length. With exfoliation of the primary
canine, the maxillary permanent canines typically emerge
with a slight labial orientation that tends to lingualize into
the arch form as eruption proceeds under the balancing
forces of the perioral tissues.
Given this tortuous and long journey, permanent
maxillary canine eruption disturbances resulting in severe displacement and/or impaction are reported in 2%
of the population, with females affected three times more
frequently than males. As the final succedaneous tooth to
erupt in the maxilla, mesiolabial displacement of the permanent canine is usually due to an arch length deficiency
as the canine assumes whatever space is left over in the
quadrant. In contrast to labial displacement, arch length
deficiency appears to be less of a factor in palatal impactions, because 85% demonstrate adequate arch length in
the involved quadrant. An etiologic factor in true palatal
impactions may actually be excessive space in the canine
area rather than a lack of arch length. When maxillary
lateral incisors are absent, peg-shaped, or smaller than the
lower incisors, palatally displaced maxillary canines are
noted in approximately 40% to 45% of patients. When
the ectopic permanent canine is close to the root of the
lateral incisor, notable displacement of the incisor and idiopathic root resorption of the incisor may occur. The resorption is often difficult to diagnose because most of the
lesions are located palatally toward the middle and apical
thirds of the incisor, with the overlapping canine crown
concealing radiographic visualization of the resorptive
process. It has been reported that up to 12.5% of ectopic

n

Managing the Developing Occlusion

461

palatally positioned canines cause resorption of the adjacent incisors. In about half of the cases analyzed, the resorption extends into the pulp of the involved teeth, with
the degree of resorption ranging from loss of one fourth
of the root to almost complete loss of root structure. The
actual percentage of resorption occurrence may be much
higher than reported due to inherent limitations of the
two-dimensional radiographs used by most clinicians.
Screening for potential displacement and impaction of
maxillary canines should start at 10 to 11 years of age
with clinical and radiographic examinations, to include
evaluation of eruption trajectory, symmetry of positioning, status of root development, and orientation to the
adjacent lateral incisor and primary canine. In cases of
mesially displaced maxillary canines with overlap of adjacent permanent lateral incisor roots beyond age 10 years,
timely removal of the adjacent primary canines, and often simultaneously the first primary molars, greatly enhances the possibility for more distal and vertical eruptive
directions (Fig. 22-51). This timing coincides with when

Figure 22-51 Example of bilateral impaction of the maxil-

lary permanent canines corrected by bilateral extraction
of the primary canines and first molars; before and after
extractions. (Giulio AB et al: Double vs single primary teeth
extraction approach as prevention of permanent maxillary
canines ectopic eruption, Pediatr Dent 32:407-412, 2010.)

462

Chapter 22

n

Managing the Developing Occlusion

eruptive forces are optimal as the permanent canine attains approximately two-thirds root development. Once
the apices of the canine are three-fourths or more formed,
the eruptive force is reduced and the tooth will more likely have to be actively moved into the mouth. The clinical examination should involve palpation of the buccal
aspect of the alveolar bone in the canine region slightly
above the primary canine. A canine bulge should be evident, indicating the presence of the canine in a normal
path of eruption at this stage of development. Although
the presence of the buccal bulge does not necessarily preclude the possibility of impaction, the absence of such a
clinical indicator by 10 to 11 years of age should warrant
exploration. A major clinical clue to significant canine
malpositioning involves excessive distal and labiolingual
tipping of the lateral incisor crown. This suggests that the
erupting canine is placing fulcrum-type pressure on the
lateral root, “pushing” the root mesially to tip the crown
in a distal direction. If the lateral crown is tipping labially,
the permanent canine is probably displaced in front of
the lateral root. If the lateral crown is tipping in a lingual
direction, the canine crown is more likely to be displaced
behind the lateral root. Other clinical signs include delayed eruption of the canine beyond 13 to 14 years of age,
with prolonged retention of primary canines, and softtissue bulging either too high in the vestibule or palatally.
Radiographic evaluation of the maxillary canine area
should be particularly emphasized when lateral incisor inclinations are pronounced (as noted before), when small
maxillary (pegged) lateral incisors are present, when primary canines are not appropriately mobile, and when the
eruptive bulging of the canines is atypical. Although excessive mesial inclination resulting in overlap of the canine crown with the lateral incisor roots, as observed on
radiographs, may suggest potential impaction, this prognostic sign can be applied reliably only if the overlapping
is present after root development of the lateral incisors
is almost complete and the canine has attained approximately two-thirds root development (i.e., around 10 to 11
years of age). At that point, the degree of overlap of the
canine crown with the lateral incisor root and the resorption pattern of the primary canine and first primary molars are key indicators for potential canine impaction and
for the prognosis of successful interceptive guidance. Localization of the labial or lingual positioning of the tooth
by special radiographic techniques is essential. (The procedure described in Chapter 2 helps in this localization.)
Studies indicate that if the displaced permanent canine
overlap of the adjacent permanent lateral incisor is not
beyond the midline long axis of the lateral (still toward
the “distal” half of the root), the chances for the canine
repositioning and erupting into normal position after primary canine extraction show roughly 85% to 90% success. If the canine overlap is beyond the lateral incisor’s
long axis (toward the mesial half of the root or beyond),
successful repositioning drops to approximately 60% of
cases, with extraction of the primary canine.
Follow-up at 1 year after the primary canine extraction
should find significant improvement in canine positioning. If not improved, the canine is probably positioned
toward the palate and will require complicated treatment

options, including surgical exposure with removal of obstructing structures to allow “hoped-for” passive eruption, surgical exposure with active orthodontic traction
to move the tooth into position, autotransplantation of
the impacted canine into the proper position, or extraction of the impacted canine and substitution by the first
premolars. Surgical exposure that allows for natural eruption is dependent on the displaced tooth having a reasonable axial inclination and incomplete root development
to achieve eruptive potential. When conditions for “passive” eruption are not met, an active approach involving
surgical exposure followed by active orthodontic traction
applied to the tooth may be necessary. Orthodontic traction involves complex biomechanical force parameters of
direction, duration, amount, and method of activation in
positioning the tooth, which are beyond the scope of our
discussion.

Maxillary Anterior Diastemas
Parents are often concerned about anterior spacing that
presents during eruption of the maxillary dentition. Unless there is a valid reason to intervene early, active treatment should be postponed until the complete eruption
of the permanent canines, because anterior spaces often
close spontaneously as the lateral incisors and particularly
the permanent canines erupt. After the canines erupt, the
condition can be reevaluated and appropriate treatment
taken as needed. Figure 22-52 shows a patient whose parent wanted the diastema closed and was concerned about
the high position of the canines. No treatment was begun. The 24-month follow-up image shows that diastema
closed, with the canines in reasonably good alignment.
Valid reasons for early closure of excess maxillary
spaces may be in consideration of atypical or asymmetric eruption patterns. Lateral incisors may be erupting
lingually without sufficient space to be aligned labially
into the arch. The maxillary incisors may be excessively
flared and “splayed,” with lip interpositioning that puts
the teeth at risk for traumatic injury. Adjusting the symmetry of alignment, consolidating spaces, and retracting
excessively proclined incisors may be indicated to facilitate long-term development. An extremely heavy labial
frenum may prevent natural closure of a diastema. If orthodontic closure is advocated, it should occur before the
frenectomy to reduce the chance of scar tissue impeding
tooth movement. If there is sufficient arch space for the
eruption of incisors and canines, it is best to delay frenum
surgery until these teeth have fully erupted.

Supernumerary Teeth
Supernumerary teeth can be associated with delayed eruption of permanent teeth, overretention of primary teeth,
deflection of roots with unusual inclinations, displacement of teeth, diastemas, abnormal root resorption, and
formation of follicular or dentigerous cysts (Fig. 22-53).
Occurring approximately eight times more frequently in
the maxilla than in the mandible, supernumerary permanent teeth have been reported in up to 3.6% of children.
The occurrence of supernumerary teeth in several members of the same family has been observed, indicating a
familial pattern. The most frequent site is the maxillary

Chapter 22

n

Managing the Developing Occlusion

463

A

A

B

C
Figure 22-52 A, Patient with midline diastema and highly
positioned canines. No treatment was instituted. B, Twentyfour months later, the diastema has closed significantly and
the canines are erupting into a more favorable position.
C, Thirty-six months later, the diastema has closed completely, and the canines have assumed a near-ideal position.

anterior segment, where atypically shaped accessory teeth
of a conical tuberculated form, known as mesiodens, occur
between the maxillary central incisors (Fig. 22-54). Reported in boys twice as often as in girls, 80% of mesiodens
have a single occurrence, whereas 20% have two or more
supernumerary teeth. The mesiodens usually presents a
peg- or cone-shaped crown with a single root. More than
90% are palatally positioned. Approximately three of
four mesiodens remain unerupted and commonly need
surgical removal at some point during treatment because
they often prevent eruption of adjacent permanent teeth
or cause their ectopic eruption. Supernumerary primary
teeth (Fig. 22-55) are apparently less common than supernumerary permanent teeth.
If a supernumerary tooth is identified through radiographic techniques (see Chapter 2), the decision whether
to intervene surgically or keep the tooth under observation must be made. If the supernumerary tooth is not
interfering with the symmetric development of adjacent
teeth and there is no evidence of cyst formation, the

B
Figure 22-53 A, Patient with an unerupted maxillary permanent central incisor and retained primary central incisor.
Permanent laterals are erupting. B, Radiograph shows a
supernumerary tooth (mesiodens), which has delayed the
eruption of the permanent incisor.

correct decision may be to observe the tooth until the
child is old enough to better tolerate the surgical procedure. Watchful waiting until the development of the
permanent incisors reaches approximately two-thirds to
three-quarters root formation allows for less risk to the
incisor development in the surgical procedures. Possible
eruption of the supernumerary tooth and avoidance of
surgical exposure are also potential benefits in delaying
intervention. However, in the case of severe exfoliation

464

Chapter 22

n

Managing the Developing Occlusion

A

B

Figure 22-54 A, Rotation and labioversion of a maxillary central incisor with midline diastema. B, Radiographic assessment
revealed a well-developed midline supernumerary tooth (mesiodens) with an inverted eruption path. Surgical removal of the
tooth is indicated.

delay ­eruption indefinitely. Ultimately, orthodontic treatment is often necessary to make adequate room for the
unerupted tooth and to position it properly in the arch.
Because of these considerations and the frequency with
which supernumerary teeth are observed, radiographic
surveys that include maxillary anterior views are essential
for children at 5 to 7 years of age, to allow for early detection and planning.

Congenitally Missing Teeth

Figure 22-55 Supernumerary maxillary right primary lateral

incisor positioned distal to the lateral incisor. There may be
corresponding supernumerary permanent teeth. The teeth
should be counted at the time of the clinical examination so
that erupted supernumerary teeth will not be overlooked.
and eruption irregularities, earlier removal of a supernumerary tooth and the over-retained primary teeth may be
desirable to lessen potential sequelae. The clinician must
still consider the status of the adjacent permanent teeth
and may prefer to wait until root development is preferably two-thirds established before surgically removing the
supernumerary tooth.
When surgical removal is accomplished, exposure of
the unerupted permanent tooth or teeth with provision
of an eruption channel is recommended (Fig. 22-56).
Reports suggest that up to 80% of permanent maxillary
teeth will spontaneously erupt after the supernumerary is removed. During surgery, the bone and soft tissue
should be removed from the incisal third of the tooth
or teeth that are delayed in their eruption. If the permanent teeth are positioned extremely high, a prolonged
period of watchful waiting may be necessary until they
have migrated within the bone to a position that would
allow for surgical intervention. An open pathway should
be maintained, if possible, to hasten the eruption of the
delayed tooth. A thin covering of dense scar tissue can

Studies have reported that congenitally missing permanent teeth (excluding third molars) occur in 2.3% to 9.6%
of the population, with no significant gender differences.
Oligodontia affects two or more teeth in about one half
of cases, frequently in a symmetric pattern involving antimeres. The most frequently missing permanent teeth are
third molars (one to four wisdom teeth are absent in up to
one third of the population), mandibular second premolars, maxillary lateral incisors, and maxillary second premolars. Morphologic changes such as cone-shaped teeth
are characteristically seen in association with missing permanent teeth—agenesis and peg-shaped maxillary lateral
incisors approximate a 1:1 ratio. The congenital absence
of primary teeth has a much lower prevalence than does
absence in the permanent dentition. The prevalence of
missing primary teeth ranges between 0.1% and 0.7%,
with absence usually located in the maxillary or mandibular incisor areas. When several primary teeth fail to
develop, other ectodermal deficiencies are usually evident
(e.g., ectodermal dysplasia). If the absence is localized to
only one or two primary teeth, no specific treatment is
generally needed. However, the long-term implications
are significant because the analogue of the permanent
tooth is derived from the primary tooth bud. Therefore a
missing primary tooth almost always means that the associated permanent tooth will be missing, with attendant
occlusal factors.
The management of congenitally missing permanent
teeth requires a thorough evaluation of arch length, occlusion, and facial growth patterns, given the long-term
consequences to aesthetic and functional arch alignment
in terms of which specific tooth is missing, adjacent teeth

Chapter 22

A

B

n

Managing the Developing Occlusion

465

C

D

E

F

G

H

I

Figure 22-56 Surgical removal of supernumerary incisors with uncovering of blocked permanent incisors allows for normative

eruption positioning of the involved incisors. A, Radiograph showing two mesiodens associated with retained primary central
incisors and delayed eruption of permanent central incisors at age 9 years and 6 months. The primary incisors were extracted
at this time. B and C, Same patient at age 11 years and 10 months. D, E, and F, Surgical removal of two mesiodens with uncovering of unerupted incisor. G, One week after surgery. H and I, Same patient at age 13 years and 1 month. One year after
surgical uncovering, no orthodontic appliances.
drifting into the space, the distribution of the space, and
supraeruption of opposing teeth. Early consultation with
the orthodontist and prosthodontist is important in determining appropriate care. If one or both of the permanent
maxillary lateral incisors are missing, the dentist must decide whether to hold space for prosthetic replacements or
to encourage the permanent canine to erupt mesially into
the lateral incisor position. In the latter instance, the mesial eruption path of the adjacent permanent canines may
erupt fully forward into the lateral space and naturally
compensate for the missing lateral incisors. This pattern
of “canine replacement” is particularly beneficial when
the patient presents with excessive maxillary overjet and
dental protrusion or a significant tooth size discrepancy
that would benefit from an extraction protocol. Consolidation of the maxillary arch form with canine “replacement” leads to reduction of the protrusive overjet and
compensation for a tooth mass discrepancy. Orthodontic
treatment is generally needed to place the canine in the
correct axial inclination before the crown is reshaped to
resemble the lateral. In some instances, the shape of the
canine may not be favorable to use as a lateral, even with

extensive recontouring. In contrast, a patient with Class
I or Class III relationships and more normal alignment
spacing usually benefits from having the canines in their
normal A-P positions and restoration of the missing lateral incisors with prosthodontic treatment (Fig. 22-57). If
the canines are erupting too far forward from their normal positions in this case, timely removal of the primary
canines may enhance a more distal eruption path toward
normal canine positions. However, with the advent of
implants for replacement of lateral incisors, that recommendation has changed. According to Kokich,55 the ideal
situation is to encourage the canine to erupt adjacent
to the permanent central incisor. After it has erupted, it
can be moved distally into its normal position. By distal
movement of the tooth, bone is maintained in forming
an alveolar ridge with adequate buccal lingual width to
facilitate proper implant placement.
When one or more permanent premolars, usually the
second premolars, are congenitally missing, should the
space be maintained for fixed prostheses later or should
it be closed? Many factors influence the decision whether
to retain or extract the overlying second primary molar,

466

Chapter 22

n

Managing the Developing Occlusion

A1

A2

A3

C

B

D
Figure 22-57 A, Congenital absence of permanent lateral incisors shown on periapical radiographs. B, The primary canines
were extracted to encourage a more distal eruption path of the permanent canines. A Hawley-type appliance with springs was
constructed to close the diastema between the central incisors. C, Auxiliary wires were added to the appliance to guide the
permanent canines into a more favorable position. D, Space has been regained for eventual fixed prostheses to replace the
lateral incisors. Meanwhile the removable retainer with lateral pontics is worn.

Chapter 22

including the degree of arch length deficiency, facial and
skeletal patterns, molar relationships, vertical aspects of
the malocclusion, anteroposterior incisor positioning,
and stage of transitional dentition. For example, if just
one premolar is absent and the rest of the occlusion is
aesthetically and functionally sound, long-term retention
of the primary molar is usually encouraged until growth
is complete and prosthodontics can be used to replace the
missing premolar. However, the larger mesiodistal width
of the primary molar may cause incorrect occlusal relationships with the permanent teeth. Slicing the mesial
and/or distal surfaces of the primary molar may allow for
improved interdigitation, but often the bulbous, divergent
roots of the primary molar prevent mesial movement of
the permanent molar. Also, the roots of the primary molar may be resorbed, and the tooth may be lost eventually.
To summarize, if the primary molar is maintaining vertical occlusion and arch length stability, then it should
be retained for alveolar bone integrity and to allow for
future implant prosthetics. An exception would be in a
child with a significant tooth size–arch size discrepancy
where a serial extraction protocol would provide successful aesthetic and functional outcomes. Early extraction
would provide positive alignment factors without compromising long-term results because later orthodontic
tooth movements will bring alveolar bone support.
The general concept of the primary molar being maintained when the underlying premolar is missing applies
except when the retained primary molar exhibits significant ankylosis. Restorative coverage (i.e., composite
buildups, stainless steel crowns) of the ankylosed primary
molar may help maintain occlusal harmony if the vertical
discrepancy is not extreme. In most cases, however, early
extraction of the affected primary molar may enhance occlusal outcomes by avoiding excess vertical collapse and
the loss of alveolar bone height that occurs secondary to
early ankylosis. Even in cases of ankylosed second primary molars over missing premolars where future prosthetic
replacement is planned, early extraction of the primary
molar may be advisable. The consequence of leaving severely displaced ankylosed primary molars when the premolars are absent will likely result in vertically compromised alveolar heights of adjacent teeth, because there is
no erupting premolar to maintain alveolar ridge integrity.
For these reasons, the early extraction of ankylosed second
primary molars when the second premolars are congenitally absent should be an early treatment planning decision and is usually desirable. If such teeth are extracted
early, the majority of alveolar ridge reduction secondary
to the extraction will occur in the first year after removal,
will represent about an overall one-third loss in width,
and is not progressive. Adjacent tooth movements usually
maintain adequate alveolar width for subsequent implant
placement and establish better arch length adjustments
for proper occlusion. Planning must also consider whether to hold the space for future prosthetic replacement
or allow “driftodontics” to start closing the space of the
missing premolar. Early extraction is particularly indicated if the case can be handled long-term with a premolar
extraction protocol and where multiple premolars are absent symmetrically. Given ­long-term considerations, the

n

Managing the Developing Occlusion

467

treatment options available, and the multiple disciplines
potentially involved, the clinician must take the lead role
in coordinating treatment and utilizing the expertise of
specialists.

OBSTRUCTIVE SLEEP APNEA
AND ORTHODONTICS
An evolving area of interest to dentistry is the management of obstructive sleep apnea in children. While the
etiology for obstructive sleep apnea is multi-factorial, it
seems clear that moderate to severe mandibular retrognathia may play a significant role for some patients. While
orthodontic interventions are not mentioned in the 2012
American Academy of Pediatrics Guidelines for Diagnosis
and Management of Childhood Obstructive Sleep Apnea
Syndrome, they are considered by some sleep medicine
experts to be an alternative treatment option.56
As discussed by De Luca Canto and colleagues, sleepdisordered breathing is of significant relevance to practicing dentists because it has been associated with a variety
of oral and craniofacial problems including chin retrusion, Class II malocclusion, vertical growth direction, and
sleep bruxism.57 While it seems clear that dentistry has an
opportunity to contribute in this significant problem area
for children, comprehensive diagnosis and management
are more than just placement of mandibular advancement appliances, such as those described in the following section. Therefore it seems reasonable that the team
approach—involving a pediatrician, dental practitioners,
sleep disorder centers that can provide definitive diagnostic techniques such as a polysomnogram, and others—is
important to ensure that the problem is diagnosed and
managed appropriately.

COMPREHENSIVE ORTHODONTICS
FOR THE DEVELOPING OCCLUSION
Comprehensive orthodontics can be defined as an indepth evaluation of a patient’s entire orofacial complex
and the corrective treatments necessary to achieve optimal dental aesthetics, facial aesthetics, skeletal balance,
and functional harmony. Comprehensive orthodontic
treatment recognizes more broadly based malocclusion
factors than those cited in interceptive orthodontics and
guidance of eruption. Diplomates of the American Board
of Orthodontics (ABO) listed the correction of skeletal
Class II and Class III malocclusions, excess vertical development, and severe tooth size–arch size discrepancies presenting displaced permanent teeth as complex problems
indicated for comprehensive levels of early treatment
intervention.58 The achievement of functional and aesthetic harmony requires the coordination of a multitude
of factors, from the fine details of tooth positioning to the
relationships of the maxilla and mandible. Since “normality” encompasses a variable range, the fundamental
goals of comprehensive orthodontic management of the
occlusion
may be delineated as the possession of:
  
1.	Dental aesthetics. The tooth alignment and arch form
are generally consistent with orthognathic Class I molar positioning, normal anterior overbite and overjet,

468

Chapter 22

n

Managing the Developing Occlusion

integrity of dentitional alignment, and symmetric
arches positioned over basal bone. The details of these
dental aesthetic descriptors are best defined in the
context of the “six keys of occlusion,” as delineated
by Andrews,59 to include proper molar relationship,
proper crown angulation and inclination, no rotations, tight contacts, and a flat occlusal plane.
2.	Facial aesthetics. Balanced facial profile and frontal
symmetry with harmonious relationships among
the jaws, teeth, and soft tissues are realized within
the context of normal facial developmental patterns
relative to patient age, ethnic/racial differences, and
growth patterns.
3.	Optimally functional occlusion. The interplay of gnathologic factors allows for comfortable and efficient
actions of the orofacial components in a harmonious neuromuscular environment without deleterious stress on the teeth, periodontal structures, and
temporomandibular joints.
4.	Stability of occlusion. When applied to postorthodontic
treatment, the interrelationships of the teeth, jaws,
and soft tissues should not only meet the aesthetic
and functional goals of treatment but also be sustained with long-lasting stability and retention of
achieved goals.
  
Comprehensive orthodontic treatment usually requires complete fixed Edgewise appliances to achieve final positioning of all or nearly all of the permanent teeth
into optimal aesthetic and functional harmony within
the alveolar basal bone. If a practitioner decides to initiate
comprehensive levels of orthodontic care, it is important
that he or she accept responsibility to provide the treatment to full completion standards. It is not appropriate to
provide only one phase of treatment with the intention
of referring the patient for the final and definitive phases
of care unless the separate treatments were predetermined
between consulting providers. If the practitioner recognizes the need for, but is unwilling or unable to provide,
comprehensive care, it is appropriate to refer the patient
to a practitioner able to address all of the orthodontic
needs.
The interventions necessary to achieve comprehensive goals may be accomplished in one single phase or
in specifically planned phases of treatment. To determine the approach in most patients, the preferred time
for evaluating comprehensive orthodontic needs and
implementing treatment is from the transitional mixed
dentition into the young permanent (adolescent) dentition. The ABO Diplomates have stated that there are
numerous advantages for both the patient and the practitioner in terms of early orthodontic treatment and, importantly, that the final results of early treatment tend
to be better. The basis for these statements lies in the fact
that the clinician has the ability, with mixed-dentition
timing, to control arch length adjustments in terms of
leeway space and late mesial molar shifts for the relief
of most levels of crowding, to utilize space-gaining and
arch-expansion procedures in reducing extraction needs,
to control incisor and buccal segment eruption patterns
for adjustments in overbite, open bite, and leveling
of the curve of Spee, to control deleterious habits and

functional deviations in occlusion, and to use growth
modification with dentofacial orthopedics for skeletal
discrepancies. Most of the January 1998 and June 2002
issues of the American Journal of Orthodontics and Dentofacial Orthopedics are dedicated to a broad range of topics
related to the rationale for common procedures used in
early orthodontic treatment. These issues serve as excellent reference sources for review.
A convenient way to look at comprehensive orthodontics in the context of “early” treatment is to relate it in
terms of the developmental stage of the dentition. The
dental stages in which comprehensive treatments are
considered for growing patients involve the full primary
to the mid-mixed dentition through transitional eruption
of the first molars and incisors (4 to 10 years of age), the
mid- to late mixed dentition overlapping the transition of
the buccal segments (10 to 12 years of age), and the early
permanent dentition (12 to 16 years of age). The general
scope of interceptive orthodontic interventions in these
stages is outlined earlier in this chapter. They serve as a
focus for the presentation of case examples that illustrate
the more comprehensive treatments necessary to address
more complex needs in growing patients.

PRIMARY TO MID-MIXED DENTITION
(AGES 4 TO 10 YEARS)
If not corrected early, abnormal dental, skeletal, and
functional relationships that are notable in the primary
dentition may have profound effects on orofacial growth
patterns. They can become increasingly difficult to correct
as the child transitions toward the permanent dentition.
Some of the more significant problems that can be treated
effectively in the primary dentition involve functional
and bilateral posterior crossbites along with deleterious
oral habits. As illustrated in earlier sections, significant
orthodontic and orthopedic changes can be affected with
various “interceptive” appliances in this period. A further
example of primary dentition intervention that potentially extends into more comprehensive concepts is shown
in Figure 22-58 with correction of a pseudo-Class III malocclusion. Without such early treatment, the functional
aspects of the malocclusion could carry over into much
more complex skeletal problems, as growth continues to
compensate for the deviations. It is not necessarily the intent of an early-phased treatment to prevent the need for
full Edgewise appliances in the permanent dentition. The
goal is to establish normal vertical, transverse, and sagittal relationships of the dentition with functional perioral
balance. However, as illustrated in this interceptive case,
it is possible to establish such a harmonious relationship
of the dental units that further treatment is unnecessary.
Such an outcome is also illustrated in Figure 22-59, where
more involved early treatment mechanics were used. Each
of these cases supports the idea that the real goal of such
treatment in developmental stages should be to minimize
or eliminate the amount of orthodontic treatment needed
in the permanent dentition, with more ideal outcomes.
The remaining cases presented involve just such comprehensive treatments, where Edgewise appliances were used
to finish the treated occlusion toward optimal functional
and aesthetic outcomes.

Chapter 22

n

Managing the Developing Occlusion

469

B

A

C

Figure 22-58 Primary dentition anterior crossbite with functional shift of mandible. A, Pretreatment clinical and model view of
occlusion. B, Anterior sagittal appliance designed to labialize the primary incisors. C, Posttreatment clinical and model view of
occlusion.

Correction of Class II skeletal relationships in the primary and early-mixed dentition stages with functional
appliances and extraoral headgear has been reported
in the literature. In contemporary practice, however,
Class II malocclusions are generally managed from the
mid- to the late mixed dentition, extending on into the

young permanent dentition, with positive outcomes.
This later timing coincides with the pubertal growth
period for enhanced dentofacial orthopedics and the
transition of the buccal dentition to optimally affect
sagittal dentoalveolar corrective changes. In addition,
later timing simplifies retention considerations of any

470

Chapter 22

n

Managing the Developing Occlusion

achieved correction by reducing the time between the
early treatment phase, the full Edgewise phase, and the
completion of growth. In contrast, skeletal Class III relationships should ideally be addressed in the primary
and incisor transition periods to establish normative
overbite and overjet relationships into the mixed and
permanent dentitions. Class III corrections in this time
frame have been consistently shown to present efficient
and effective treatment outcomes compared with later
treatment timing. This particularly applies if the Class
III pattern involves a retruded maxillary complex as the

causative factor or if the anteroposterior discrepancy is
the result of a functional anterior displacement of the
mandible (pseudo-Class III). If the major component
of the Class III pattern is a severe skeletal overgrowth
of the mandible, attempts at correction are more variable and often require retreatment as the lower jaw outgrows the correction. This is especially true if there is a
strong genetic/familial component to the mandibular
prognathia.
Vertical growth abnormalities can also be successfully
managed in this early transitional period. Patients with

A

B

C
Figure 22-59 Patient treated with phase I orthodontics only. A, Pretreatment occlusal views; note tapered maxillary arch

and arch length insufficiency in the mandibular arch. B, Phase I treatment with fixed 2 × 4 Edgewise appliances, maxillary
transpalatal bar, and mandibular lip bumper. Note arch length development, particularly in the lower arch. C, Posttreatment
occlusal views in permanent dentition without additional full Edgewise bracketing.

Chapter 22

deep overbites and a horizontal growth pattern (low mandibular plane angle) may benefit from a removable anterior bite plane to allow for supraeruption of the posterior
dentition.
Because the permanent incisors and first molars
have erupted by ages 8 to 9 years in both arches, fixed
Edgewise appliances can be placed in a segmental fashion to accomplish specific dental orthodontic movements. Molar-to-incisor bracketing treatments (2 × 4
setup) generally last 6 to 12 months and are designed
to correct severe and detrimental displacements in establishing normative overbite and overjet of the incisor
segments. After the 2 × 4 mechanics, the patient is typically placed in a resting retention phase until full eruption of the permanent dentition is established around
ages 12 to 13 years. A first-phase approach involving

n

Managing the Developing Occlusion

471

a 2 × 4 setup with a transpalatal bar for anchorage to
help correct a Class II division 2 deep-bite malocclusion at age 9 years and 4 months is presented in Figure 22-60. Lower arch development was enhanced with
a mandibular lip bumper during the upper retention
phase. Full Edgewise appliances followed in the permanent dentition to finalize alignments (age, 12 years and
10 months).

MID- TO LATE MIXED DENTITION (AGES 10 TO
12 YEARS)
Given that the majority of patients present with Class I
skeletal relationships and that any malocclusion requiring treatment most likely involves crowding, the incorporation of space supervision concepts with the ­control
of leeway space is a major component of treatment

A

B
Figure 22-60 A, Class II division 2 deep-bite malocclusion in a child aged 9 years and 4 months with mesofacial growth
pattern, retrognathic mandible, ANB = +6 degrees, moderate incisor crowding. B, A maxillary 2 × 4 with a transpalatal bar
was used along with a mandibular lip bumper for 8 months of phase I treatment. The upper was retained with a Hawley bite
plane; the lip bumper was continued for an additional 18 months.

Continued

472

Chapter 22

n

Managing the Developing Occlusion

C

D
Figure 22-60, cont’d C, Patient started second Edgewise phase that continued for a total of 15 months until age 12 years and

7 months. D, Final records obtained 3 months after removal of Edgewise appliances at age 12 years and 10 months.

in the late mixed dentition. Addressed in a sequential
consideration of guidance in an earlier section of this
chapter, Figure 22-61 illustrates the value of a mandibular lingual holding arch in the relief of lower anterior
crowding at 11 years and 8 months of age in controlling leeway space. Class I molar relationships were
maintained with the lingual arch and selective primary
extractions over 18 months of space supervision. Seventeen months of full Edgewise appliances completed the
alignment (15 years and 5 months).
Patients who present with skeletal Class II malocclusions often benefit from dentofacial orthopedics involving directed extraoral headgear mechanics and/or
mandibular advancement (functional) appliances during
the late mixed dentition period. The growth modification appliances, timed with pubertal growth, enhance
maxillary to mandibular skeletal and dental relationships
in preparation for full Edgewise appliances to finish and
detail final alignment.
Mid- to late dentition treatments in managing the occlusion, with full Edgewise appliances to follow in the
permanent
dentition, typically involve:
  
Space supervision. To hold lower leeway space (lingual

holding arch), hold upper leeway space, and derotate
permanent first molars (transpalatal bar).
Expansion appliances. Transpalatal arch bars, Hyrax, lip
bumpers.
Fixed Edgewise appliances and archwires. Banded molars
and bracketed incisors for 2 × 4 mechanics. Allows for
molar derotation and uprighting, incisor leveling, incisor alignment, and incisor protraction or retraction.
Extraoral headgear. Directed cervical-pull, high-pull, or
protraction reverse-pull headgear applications, with
selection dependent on the vertical and sagittal facial
growth patterns as well as the stage of development.
Often used with anterior bite planes.
Functional appliances. Removable (e.g., Bionator) and
fixed (e.g., Herbst) mandibular advancement appliances serve as examples of many options for Class II
problems. Reverse-pull facemasks and maxillary and
mandibular miniplates with orthopedic traction are
examples for Class III problems. The type of functional appliance and its design vary significantly depending on the facial growth pattern.
Selected extractions. Timely removal of both primary
teeth and selected permanent teeth in guidance

Chapter 22

n

Managing the Developing Occlusion

473

A

B
Figure 22-61 A, Class I mixed dentition in a patient aged 11 years and 8 months with notable anterior crowding, delayed
dental developmental timing, mesofacial growth pattern, and bilateral ankylosed lower primary molars. B, Patient at age 13
years and 10 months after 26 months’ guidance with selective extraction of upper primary canines and first molars, lower first
and second primary molars, and passive lingual holding arch.
Continued

and serial extraction protocols optimizes the use of
available space. The patient’s diagnosis influences
which “early” treatment modalities would be appropriate. One pervasive philosophy in early orthodontic treatment is that the simplest biomechanics
necessary to achieve the desired treatment outcome
is the best.

EARLY PERMANENT DENTITION (AGES 12 TO 16
YEARS)
Comprehensive orthodontic care in the adolescent
permanent dentition again includes both orthopedic
and orthodontic components. Orthopedic components
might involve continued applications of palatal expanders, headgears, and functional appliances. Figure 22-62

illustrates the correction of a Class II malocclusion with
a functional appliance in the permanent dentition. An
activator for mandibular advancement worn in combination with a high-pull headgear for restraint of maxillary growth addressed the skeletal Class II problem. The
orthodontic component included full fixed Edgewise
appliances to establish occlusal relationships as near to
“ideal” as possible. Extraction of a single maxillary first
premolar was used in the full Edgewise phase to camouflage the midline asymmetry in finishing with a good
buccal occlusion.
Localized tooth displacements such as maxillary canine impactions and significant genetic tooth size–arch
size discrepancies not manageable with space supervision
procedures are also commonly addressed in this period.

474

Chapter 22

n

Managing the Developing Occlusion

C

D
Figure 22-61, cont’d C, Full upper and lower Edgewise appliances were used for a total of 15 months. D, Final records obtained after removal of Edgewise appliances at age 15 years and 5 months.

The removal of selected permanent teeth in cases of significant tooth size–arch size discrepancies with severe
tooth displacements or to camouflage Class II or Class III
dental malocclusions often offers good options as part of
a comprehensive treatment plan.
If a patient has undergone an earlier phase of treatment successfully, the Edgewise phase of treatment
might take as little as 12 to 18 months and, it is hoped,
will involve few, if any, orthopedic needs. However,
if this is the start of comprehensive care, more treatment time will likely be needed. Treatment with full
Edgewise appliances includes leveling and alignment of
the dentition, space consolidation, transverse coordination of upper to lower arch forms, sagittal arch coordination (Class II or III elastic wear), establishment
of root parallelism over basal bone, finishing and detailing of intra- and interarch positioning (i.e., first-,
second-, and third-order archwire bends), and buccal
or anterior segmental finishing procedures to establish
maximum interdigitation between arches. In selected
patients, the Edgewise treatment may be more limited,
unnecessary as determined by the dental practitioner,

or unwanted as determined by the patient and/or parent. Limited treatment can involve segmented arch
therapy in which only the teeth or arch needing attention is addressed. Occasionally the practitioner may be
so satisfied with the result after an earlier phase that
no further treatment is recommended. However, this
is fairly uncommon. A more likely occurrence is that
the patient and/or parents decide that they are satisfied
with the result, even though some finishing details are
needed. It is critical to stress to parents before initiating
early treatments that most children will benefit from a
final period of full orthodontic appliances (phase II) to
optimize aesthetic and functional outcomes. It is particularly important to allow for final tooth positioning
of the permanent second molars.
Retention following the definitive stage of comprehensive Edgewise treatment should involve the philosophy of
“retention for a lifetime.” There are many different types
of retention schemes. Although no perfect retention
scheme has been developed and periodic observation is
warranted for all, the following retention schedule seems
to
provide for stable results:
  

Chapter 22

n

Managing the Developing Occlusion

475

A

B

C
Figure 22-62 A, Class II division 1 mixed dentition with convex profile, lip interpositioning, mesofacial growth patterns, ANB =
+10 degrees, mandibular retrognathia, and maxillary dental protrusion in a patient aged 11 years and 9 months. B, Patient after 12
months of wearing a mandibular functional advancement appliance (i.e., Activator) and cervical-pull headgear in combination with
following a regimen of 12 to 14 hours of wear per day. C, Patient started full Edgewise phase at age 12 years and 10 months. The
treatment progress at 14 months of Edgewise use illustrates midline asymmetry with Class I right and Class II left buccal occlusion.
Continued

476

Chapter 22

n

Managing the Developing Occlusion

D

E
Figure 22-62, cont’d D, Treatment progress at 25 months of Edgewise treatment illustrates midline symmetry attained in con-

junction with selective extraction of the upper left first premolar. E, Final records obtained at age 15 years and 0 months after
12 months of growth modification and 26 months of Edgewise appliances.

1.	Maxillary and mandibular Hawley retainers worn
24 hours a day for 4 to 6 months, followed by 6 to
8 months of at-night-only wear.
2.	After 1 year, reassess if wear can be reduced to 1 or
2 nights per week with the patient increasing wear
as needed if the retainers become tight from tooth
movement.
3.	Continue wear as above for “retention for a lifetime”
or, at an absolute minimum, until age 21 years, at
which time the craniofacial growth rate has been
reduced to that of an adult.
  
The use of a backup set of thin acrylic overlay retainers is a useful way of inexpensively giving the patient
an emergency set of retainers if the Hawley retainers
are lost or damaged. As an added benefit, they can be
used for home bleaching of the teeth for those patients

who are interested. Fixed retention may be necessary in
special circumstances. A lower canine-to-canine fixed,
bonded wire can be helpful for severe rotations, and
an upper lateral-to-lateral fixed, bonded wire is useful
to prevent space opening for patients with initial diastemas.
One final thought that seems of particular interest to
parents regards the effect of extraction of third molars on
late lower incisor crowding. Although more studies will
be necessary to corroborate the results, a nicely done prospective randomized controlled clinical trial of orthodontic patients who had early extraction of third molars vs.
those who did not showed no clinically significant difference in incisor crowding between the two. The authors
concluded that removal of third molars to reduce or prevent incisor crowding was not justified.60

Chapter 22

REFERENCES
1.	American Academy of Pediatric Dentistry. Reference manual:
Guideline management of the developing dentition and occlusion in pediatric dentistry, http://www.aapd.org/media/
Policies_Guidelines/G_DevelopDentition.pdf, accessed September 1 2014.
2.	Ngan PW, et al.: Orthodontic treatment in the primary dentition, J Am Dent Assoc 116:336–340, 1988.
3.	Moyers RE: Handbook of Orthodontics, ed 4, Chicago, 1988,
CV Mosby.
4.	Baume LJ: Physiological tooth migration and its significance for
the development of occlusion, J Dent Res 29: 123-132(331-348):
440–447, 1950.
5.	Moorrees CFA: Growth changes of the dental arches: a longitudinal study, J Can Dent Assoc 24:449–457, 1958.
6.	Moorrees CFA: Dentition of the Growing Child, Cambridge,
1959, Harvard University Press.
7.	Bishara SE, et al.: Arch width changes from 6 weeks to 45
years of age, Am J Orthod Dentofacial Orthop 111:401–409,
1997.
8.	Moyers RE, Wainwright RL: Skeletal contributions to occlusal development. In McNamara JA, editor: The Biology
of Occlusal Development, Craniofacial Growth Series, Monograph, 1977, pp 89–111. University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan.
9.	Nance HN: The limitations of orthodontic treatment. I.
Mixed dentition diagnosis and treatment, Am J Orthod
33:177–223, 1947.
10.	Gianelly AA: Crowding—timing of treatment, Angle Orthod
64:414–418, 1994.
11.	Gianelly AA: Leeway space and the resolution of crowding in
the mixed dentition, Semin Orthod 1:188–194, 1995.
12.	Sonis A, Ackerman M: E-space preservation: is there a relationship to mandibular second molar impaction? Angle
Orthod 81(6):1045–1049, 2011.
13.	Miyamoto W, et al.: Effect of premature loss of deciduous
canines and molars on malocclusion of the permanent dentition, J Dent Res 55:584–590, 1976.
14.	Owen DG: The incidence and nature of space closure following the premature extraction of deciduous teeth—a literature
survey, Am J Orthod 59:37–49, 1971.
15.	Grøn AM: Prediction of tooth emergence, J Dent Res 41:
573–585, 1962.
16.	Brill WA: The distal shoe space maintainer: chairside fabrication and clinical performance, Pediatr Dent 24:561–565,
2002.
17.	Carroll CE, Jones JE: Pressure-appliance therapy following premature loss of primary molars, J Dent Child 49:347–351, 1982.
18.	Waldon K, et al.: Indications for the use of auto-transplantation of teeth in the child and adolescent, Eur Arch Paediatr
Dent 13(4):210–216, 2012.
19.	Bauss O, et al.: Autotransplantation of immature third molars: influence of different splinting methods and fixation
periods, Dent Traumatol 18(6):322–328, 2002.
20.	Ramfjord SP: Bruxism: a clinical and electromyographic
study, J Am Dent Assoc 62:21–44, 1961.
21.	Sheppard IM: The treatment of bruxism, Dent Clin North Am
207–213, 1960.
22.	Traisman AS, Traisman HS: Thumb- and finger-sucking: a
study of 2,650 infants and children, J Pediatr 52:566–572,
1959.
23.	Subtelny JD: Oral habits—studies in form, function, and
therapy, Angle Orthod 43:349–383, 1973.
24.	Subtelny JD: Oral respiration: facial maldevelopment and
corrective dentofacial orthopedics, Angle Orthod 50:147–164,
1980.

n

Managing the Developing Occlusion

477

25.	Popovich F, Thompson GW: Thumb and finger sucking—its
relation to malocclusion, Am J Orthod 63:148–155, 1973.
26.	Zardetto CG, et al.: Effects of different pacifiers on the primary dentition and oral myofunctional structures of preschool
children, Pediatr Dent 24:522–560, 2002.
27.	Haryett RD, et al.: Chronic thumb-sucking: psychologic effectiveness of various methods of treatment, Am J Orthod
53:569–585, 1967.
28.	Haryett RD, et al.: Chronic thumb-sucking—a second report on treatment and its psychologic effects, Am J Orthod
57:164–178, 1970.
29.	Haskell BS, Mink JR: An aid to stop thumb sucking—the
“Bluegrass” appliance, Pediatr Dent 13:83–85, 1991.
30.	Davidson PO, et al.: Thumb-sucking: habit or symptom?
J Dent Child 34:252–259, 1967.
31.	Proffit WR: Contemporary Orthodontics, ed 5, St. Louis, 2013,
Mosby.
32.	Fletcher BT: Etiology of finger-sucking: review of literature,
J Dent Child 42:293–298, 1975.
33.	Hanson ML, Cohen MS: Effects of form and function on swallowing and the developing dentition, Am J Orthod 64:63–74,
1973.
34.	Profitt WR: Equilibrium theory revisited—factors influencing
position of the teeth, Angle Orthod 48:175–185, 1978.
35.	Rosa M, et al.: Spontaneous correction of anterior crossbite
by RPE anchored on deciduous teeth in the early mixed dentition, Eur J Paed Dent 13(3):176–180, 2012.
36.	Kurol J, Bergland L: Longitudinal study and cost-benefit
analysis of the effect of early treatment of posterior crossbites in the primary dentition, Eur J Orthod 14:173–179,
1992.
37.	Modéer T, et al.: Sucking habits and their relation to posterior crossbite in 4 year old children, Scand J Dent Res 90:
323–328, 1982.
38.	Lindner A, Modéer T: Relation between sucking habits and
dental characteristics in preschool children with unilateral
crossbite, Scand J Dent Res 97:278–283, 1989.
39.	Kutin G, Hawes RR: Posterior cross-bites in the deciduous
and mixed dentitions, Am J Orthod 56:491–504, 1969.
40.	Hesse K, et al.: Changes in condylar position and occlusion
associated with maxillary expansion for correction of functional unilateral posterior crossbite, Am J Orthod Dentofac Orthop 111:410–418, 1997.
41.	Myers DR, et al.: Condylar position in children with functional posterior crossbites before and after correction, Pediatr
Dent 2:190–194, 1980.
42.	Pirtiniemi P, et al.: Relationship between craniofacial and
condyle path asymmetry in unilateral crossbite patients, Eur
J Orthod 12:408–413, 1990.
43.	Lindner A: Longitudinal study on the effect of early interceptive treatment in 4-year-old children with unilateral crossbite, Scand J Dent Res 197:432–441, 1989.
44.	Krebs AA: Rapid expansion of mid-palatal suture by fixed appliance. An implant study over a 7- year period, Trans Eur
Orthod 131–132, 1964.
45.	Hicks EP: Slow maxillary expansion—a clinical study of skeletal versus dental response to low magnitude force, Am J Orthop 73:121–141, 1979.
46.	Thomas GG, et al.: Experimentally determined forces of maxillary lingual arch expansion appliances, J Pedod 7(1):3–7,
1982.
47.	Harberson VA, Myers DR: Mid-palatal suture opening during functional posterior crossbite correction, Am J Orthod
74(3):310–313, 1978.
48.	Bell RA, Lecompte EJ: The effects of maxillary expansion using a quad-helix appliance during the deciduous and mixed
dentitions, Am J Orthod 79:152–157, 1981.

478

Chapter 22

n

Managing the Developing Occlusion

49.	Bjerklin K, Kurol J: Ectopic eruption of the maxillary first
permanent molar: etiologic factors, Am J Orthod 84:147–155,
1983.
50.	Young DH: Ectopic eruption of the first permanent molar,
J Dent Child 24:153–162, 1957.
51.	DeBaets J, Chiarini M: The pseudo class I: a newly defined
type of malocclusion, J Clin Orthod 29:73–88, 1995.
52.	Dugoni SA, et al.: Early mixed dentition treatment—postretention evaluation of stability and relapse, Angle Orthod
65:311–320, 1995.
53.	Rebellato J, et al.: Lower arch perimeter preservation using
the lingual arch, Am J Orthod Dentofac Orthop 112:449–456,
1997.
54.	Brennan MM, Gianelly AA: The use of the lingual arch in
the mixed dentition to resolve incisor crowding, Am J Orthod
Dentofac Orthop 117:81–85, 2000.
55.	Kokich VG: Congenitally missing teeth—orthodontic management in the adolescent patient, Am J Orthod Dentofac Orthop 121:594–595, 2002.
56.	Trosman I: Childhood obstructive sleep apnea syndrome: a
review of the American Academy of Pediatrics Guidelines,
Pediatr Ann 42(10):195–199, 2013.
57.	De Luca Canto G, et al.: Capability of questionnaires and
clinical examinations to assess sleep-disordered breathing in
children: a systematic review and meta-analysis, J Am Dent
Assoc 145(2):165–178, 2014.
58.	Bishara SE, et al.: Proceedings of the workshop discussions
on early orthodontic treatment. College of Diplomates of
the American Board of Orthodontics, Am J Orthod Dentofac
Orthop 113:5–6, 1998.
59.	Andrews LF: The six keys to normal occlusion, Am J Orthod
62:296–309, 1972.
60.	Harradine NW, Pearson MH, Toth B: The effect of extraction
of third molars on late lower incisor crowding: a randomized
controlled trial, Br J Orthod 25(2):117–122, 1998.

SUGGESTED READINGS
Bacetti T, Franchi L, McNamara JA: Treatment and post-treatment
craniofacial changes after rapid maxillary expansion and
facemask therapy, Am J Orthod Dentofac Orthop 118:404–413,
2000.
Bishara SE: Impacted maxillary canines, Am J Orthod Dentofac
Orthop 101:159–171, 1992.
De Clerck HJ, et al.: Orthopedic traction of the maxilla with
miniplates: a new perspective for treatment of midface deficiency, J Oral Maxillofac Surg 67(10):2123–2129, 2009.

Dincer M, et al.: Space maintainer effects on intercanine arch
width and length, J Clin Pediatr Dent 21:47–50, 1996.
Ericson S, Kurol J: Resorption of incisors after ectopic eruption
of maxillary canines—a CT study, Angle Orthod 70:415–423,
2000.
Foley TF, Wright GZ, Weinberger SJ: Management of lower
incisor crowding in the early mixed dentition, J Dent Child
63:169–174, 1996.
Halterman CW: A simple technique for the treatment of ectopically erupting permanent first molars, J Am Dent Assoc
105:1031–1033, 1982.
Humphrey WP: A simple technique for correcting an ectopically
erupting first permanent molar, J Dent Child 29:176–178,
1962.
Kennedy DB, Turley PK: Clinical management of ectopically
erupting first permanent molars, Am J Orthod Dentofac Orthop
96:336–345, 1987.
Kluemper GT, Beeman CS, Hicks EP: Early orthodontic treatment—what are the imperatives? J Am Dent Assoc 131:613–620,
2000.
Koroluk LD, Tulloch JF, Phillips C: Incisor trauma and early
treatment for Class II Division I malocclusion, Am J Orthod
Dentofacial Orthop 123:117–126, 2003.
Moorrees CFA, Chadha JM: Available space for the incisors
during dental development: a growth study based on physiologic age, Angle Orthod 35:12–24, 1965.
Moorees CFA, et al.: Growth studies of the dentition—a review,
Am J Orthod 55:600–613, 1969.
Ngan P, Alkire RG, Fields H: Management of space problems
in the primary and mixed dentitions, J Am Dent Assoc
130:1330–1339, 1999.
Pancherz H, et al.: Thirty-two year follow-up study of Herbst
therapy: a biometric dental cast analysis, Am J Orthod
Dentofacial Orthop 145(1):15–27, 2014.
Rajab LD: Clinical performance and survival of space maintainers—evaluation over a period of five years, J Dent Child
69:156–160, 2002.
Tulloch JF, et al.: Outcomes in a 2-phase randomized clinical
trial of early Class II treatment, Am J Orthod Dentofac Orthop
125:657–667, 2004.
Vargo J, et al.: Treatment effects and short-term relapse of
maxillomandibular expansion during the early to mid-mixed
dentition, Am J Orthod Dentofac Orthop 131:456–463, 2007.
Vizzotto MB, et al.: The Quad-helix appliance in the primary
dentition—orthodontic and orthopedic measurements, J Clin
Pediatr Dent 32(2):165–170, 2007.

CHAPTER

23

Multidisciplinary Team
Approach to Cleft Lip and
Palate Management
s LaQuia A. Walker Vinson, Donald V. Huebener, James E. Jones,
Roberto L. Flores, and Jeffrey A. Dean

For additional resources, please visit the

website.

CHAPTER OUTLINE
CLASSIFICATION OF CLEFT LIP
AND PALATE
MULTIDISCIPLINARY CLEFT LIP
AND PALATE TEAM
GENERAL RESPONSIBILITIES
OF TEAM MEMBERS
Dental Specialties

Medical and Allied Health
Specialties
MULTIDISCIPLINARY SEQUENCING
OF TREATMENT IN CLEFTS
Stage I (Infant Appliance Stage:
Birth to 18 Months of Age)

C

left lip and palate, the most common of the craniofacial anomalies, are severe congenital anomalies
with a global incidence of 0.28 to 3.74 per 1000 live
births. In the United States, cleft lip and palate occur in
approximately 1 in 940 newborns.1 The incidence varies
widely among races: about 1 in 800 white newborns, 1 in
2000 black newborns, and 1 in 500 Japanese or Navaho
Indian newborns. Isolated cleft palate occurs in about 1
in 2000 newborns and demonstrates less racial variation.
Cleft lip and palate together account for approximately
50% of all cases, whereas isolated cleft lip and isolated
cleft palate each occurs in about 25% of cases. Some of
these congenital anomalies appear to be genetically determined, although the majority are of unknown cause or
are attributable to teratogenic influences (see Chapter 5).

CLASSIFICATION OF CLEFT LIP
AND PALATE
There is a tendency to conceptualize cleft lip and palate as
a homogenous anomaly. If that were true, a treatment plan
applicable to all cases could be formulated. However, the reality is that clefts vary widely in their clinical presentations.
According to Harkins, to standardize the reporting of
cleft lip and palate, the Nomenclature Committee of the
American Association of Cleft Palate Rehabilitation devised a classification system that later was adopted by the
Cleft Palate Association.2 The complexity of this system,
however, has made its acceptance less than overwhelming. Veau in 1931 proposed the most frequently used system.3 He classified clefts of the lip as follows:
  
•	Class I—a unilateral notching of the vermilion not
extending into the lip

Stage II (Primary Dentition Stage: 18
Months to 5 Years of Age)
Stage III (Late Primary or Early
Mixed Dentition Stage: 6 to 10
or 11 Years of Age)
Stage IV (Permanent Dentition
Stage: 12 to 18 Years of Age)

•	Class II—a unilateral notching of the vermilion
border, with the cleft extending into the lip but not
including the floor of the nose
•	Class III—a unilateral clefting of the vermilion border
of the lip extending into the floor of the nose
•	Class IV—any bilateral clefting of the lip, whether it
be incomplete notching or complete clefting
  
Veau divided palatal clefts into four classes as follows
(Fig. 23-1):
  
•	Class I—involves only the soft palate
•	Class II—involves the soft and hard palates but not
the alveolar process
•	Class III—involves both soft and hard palates and the
alveolar process on one side of the premaxillary area
•	Class IV—involves both soft and hard palates and
continues through the alveolus on both sides of the
premaxilla, leaving it free and often mobile
  
Veau did not include submucous clefts of the palate
in his classification system. Submucous clefts may frequently be diagnosed by the following physical findings:
bifid uvula, palpable notching at the posterior portion of
the hard palate, and a zona pellucida (thin, translucent
membrane). Submucous clefts of the palate may be associated with an incomplete velopharyngeal mechanism or
eustachian tube dysfunction.

MULTIDISCIPLINARY CLEFT LIP
AND PALATE TEAM
Children born with cleft lip and palate have many problems that need to be solved for successful habilitation.
The complexity of these problems requires that numerous health care practitioners cooperate in providing the
479

480

Chapter 23

n

Multidisciplinary Team Approach to Cleft Lip and Palate Management

Lip

Lip

Alveolar ridge

Alveolar ridge

Prepalate

Prepalate

Incisive foramen

Incisive foramen

Hard palate

Hard palate

Soft palate

Soft palate

A

C

B
Lip

Lip

Alveolar ridge

Alveolar ridge

Prepalate

Prepalate

Incisive foramen

Incisive foramen

Hard palate

Hard palate

Soft palate

Soft palate

©IUSM Medical Illustration

D

Figure 23-1 Veau’s classification of cleft lip and palate. Shaded area, extent of the cleft. A, Class I cleft of the soft palate only.

B, Class II cleft of the soft and hard palates but not involving the alveolar process. C, Class III unilateral complete cleft of the
lip and palate. D, Class IV bilateral complete cleft of the lip and palate.
specialized knowledge and skills necessary to ensure comprehensive care. The multidisciplinary cleft lip and palate
team concept has evolved from that need.
To address the many treatment regimens and different care protocols, the American Cleft Palate–Craniofacial
Association (http://www.cleftpalate-craniofacial.org) convened a consensus conference on recommended practices
for the care of patients with craniofacial anomalies. This
conference produced the document “Parameters for Evaluation and Treatment of Patients with Cleft Lip/Palate or
Other Craniofacial Anomalies.”4 This serves as a guide for
implementing the multidisciplinary approach to cleft and
craniofacial care and is used by teams in the United States
and Canada.
Because optimal care is best achieved by multiple types
of clinical expertise, the teams may be composed of individuals in (1) dental specialties (orthodontics, oral surgery,
pediatric dentistry, and prosthodontics), (2) medical specialties (genetics, otolaryngology, pediatrics, plastic surgery,

and psychiatry), and (3) allied health care fields (audiology,
nursing, psychology, social work, and speech pathology).
These care providers assess the patient’s medical status and general development, dental development, facial
aesthetics, psychological well-being, hearing, and speech
development. Team members must communicate effectively among themselves, with the child and parents, and
with the primary care physician and dentist. Individuals
on the team must respect one another’s opinions and be
flexible in planning and carrying out therapy. Periodic
evaluation is necessary to assess the effect of previous
therapy and to determine whether an alternative approach may be necessary. A team conference immediately
after patient examination is a desirable way to discuss current problems and plan timely therapy.
Whitehouse describes the clinical team as a “close, cooperative, democratic, multiprofessional union devoted
to a common purpose—the best treatment of the fundamental needs of the patient.”5

Chapter 23

n

Multidisciplinary Team Approach to Cleft Lip and Palate Management

481

GENERAL RESPONSIBILITIES OF TEAM
MEMBERS
DENTAL SPECIALTIES
The pediatric dentist is responsible for the overall dental
care of the patient. Numerous dental anomalies and malocclusions occur with a cleft lip or palate. These may be
attributed to the congenital clefting itself or may be secondary to the surgical correction of the primary defects. A
high correlation is found between the number and severity
of dental problems and the type and severity of the cleft.
The pediatric dentist should discuss with the patient
and parents the traditional dental problems associated
with clefting. Any one, or several, of the following conditions may occur with a significantly greater frequency
than in the general population:
  
1.	If there is a natal or neonatal tooth observed in a
patient with a complete unilateral or bilateral cleft
­palate, it is usually a maxillary central incisor (Fig.
23-2).
2.	There is a high incidence of congenitally absent
teeth, especially the primary or permanent lateral incisor, adjacent to the alveolar cleft. There is also an
increased incidence of congenitally missing second
premolars.
3.	There is a significant increase in the frequency of supernumerary teeth (Fig. 23-3), which are often seen in
children with complete unilateral or bilateral clefts.
Occasionally, there can be supernumerary teeth and
congenitally missing teeth in patients with cleft lip
only, with or without notching of the alveolus.
4.	It is common to find ectopic primary lateral incisors
located palatally, adjacent to, or within the cleft site.
In the permanent dentition, canines on the side of
the complete alveolar cleft may erupt palatally into
the cleft.
5.	Various anomalies of tooth morphology are frequently seen in association with complete unilateral and bilateral clefts of the palate. These include
enamel hypoplasia, microdontia or macrodontia,
fused teeth, and aberrations in crown shape. The
teeth most often affected are the primary and permanent maxillary incisors.
6.	Permanent teeth that erupt adjacent to a cleft alveolar ridge usually have a deficiency of supporting alveolar bone about the root surfaces. These teeth are
susceptible to premature loss. A decrease in alveolar
bone support may be accentuated when periodontal
disease is present or when orthodontic appliance
therapy is used indiscriminately.
7.	Permanent central incisors adjacent to an alveolar
cleft frequently erupt in a rotated position and with
deviations of axial root inclination.
8.	Patients with a complete cleft palate and alveolus
do not have a contiguous maxillary arch. External
forces applied to the maxilla (e.g., by muscles of
mastication or by the contraction of scar tissue
after surgical repair of the cleft palate) can result
in medial collapse of the posterior segments. A
posterior crossbite may be observed unilaterally or
bilaterally.

Figure 23-2 Neonatal maxillary central incisor in a newborn

infant with a bilateral complete cleft lip and palate.

Figure 23-3 Maxillary occlusal radiograph demonstrating

supernumerary maxillary central incisors.

9.	In an infant with a complete bilateral cleft lip and
palate, the premaxilla is often protuberant and
mobile. There may be a greater than 100% overbite,
with subsequent stripping of the labially attached
gingiva overlying the mandibular incisors (Fig. 23-4).
Traumatic anterior end-to-end occlusion, or an anterior crossbite, is also common.
10.	In a patient with a complete unilateral or bilateral
cleft palate, the lateral facial profile may appear
noticeably convex (Fig. 23-5). This may become
more perceptible as the child grows older. The
appearance may be attributed to a true mandibular or pseudomandibular prognathism. In
pseudomandibular prognathism, the maxilla is in
spatial disharmony with the mandible. This may
be caused by a retrognathic maxilla or an attenuation of the anteroposterior and vertical growth of
the maxilla.

Pediatric Dentist
Preventive dental care is extremely important in these
cases. Parents are often overwhelmed by other aspects of

482

Chapter 23

n

Multidisciplinary Team Approach to Cleft Lip and Palate Management

Figure 23-4 Bilateral complete cleft lip and palate demon-

strating a greater than 100% overbite. Stripping of the labially attached gingiva of the mandibular central and lateral
incisors is common in this presentation.

the first year of life. Fluoride supplements, dentifrices,
and rinses are indicated if the patient lives in a nonfluoridated community. The parents and patient should be
instructed in proper dental hygiene techniques, especially
around the defect. Close communication between the primary care dentist and the cleft team is important to ensure the continuity of care necessary during the extended
treatment of such patients. Routine periodic reports from
the cleft team should be forwarded to the child’s primary care dentist, especially during orthodontic or surgical
treatment. Pediatric dentists are often involved in the
presurgical and postsurgical treatment phases of maxillary orthopedics. Both active and passive appliances are
used to bring the cleft segments into a more ideal alignment and thereby promote a more favorable initial surgical outcome.

Orthodontist
The orthodontist plays a key role in the diagnosis and
treatment of a cleft condition by obtaining the records
necessary for diagnosis and treatment planning. These
include cephalometric and panoramic radiographs, study
models, and diagnostic photographs. Analysis of these
records enables the orthodontist to describe and quantitate the facial skeleton and soft-tissue deformities. Using expertise in the growth and development of the facial
skeleton, this specialist can identify problem areas and,
with some limitations, predict growth and development.
Many team members depend on the orthodontist’s analysis and quantitations of the cleft anomaly for treatment
planning.
The orthodontist also provides comprehensive orthodontic care for patients. Most orthodontic care can be
considered conventional, but for difficult dental configurations, innovation and imagination are required for
treatment. If surgical treatment is indicated, the orthodontist works closely with the surgeon to plan the most
appropriate procedure. Immediate postoperative function, aesthetic result, and long-term stability are factors
considered before surgery.

Oral and Maxillofacial Surgeon

Figure 23-5 Lateral facial profile of an adolescent boy with

a repaired bilateral complete cleft lip and palate. Maxillary
hypoplasia, secondary to the cleft defect, often produces a
greatly concave lateral facial profile.
the cleft deformity and may give dental care a low priority
or even neglect it altogether. The intact dental occlusion
is the foundation upon which future orthodontic therapy takes place. For this reason, optimum dental health
is essential for the total habilitation of the patient. Any
compromise will lead to a less than optimal result. Routine prophylaxis and fluoride treatments are mandatory.
Referral for preventive dental care should be made ­during

The ability to surgically alter skeletal relationships of the
maxillomandibular complex is the basis for participation
by the oral and maxillofacial surgeon on the cleft team.
This specialist evaluates all patients for facial form and
function and jaw position. Many patients have significant
skeletal malocclusions that cannot be treated by conventional orthodontics and require surgical correction.
The surgical placement of alveolar cleft bone grafts is
another important role of the oral and maxillofacial surgeon. These grafts aid in dental habilitation. The grafted
bone supports the teeth adjacent to the cleft site and provides bone through which teeth may erupt. A detailed
discussion of these grafts follows later in this chapter.

Prosthodontist
The maxillofacial prosthodontist replaces, restores, or rehabilitates orofacial structures that may be congenitally
missing or malformed. Nonliving materials are used to
restore and enhance form and anatomy. There is a special

Chapter 23

n

Multidisciplinary Team Approach to Cleft Lip and Palate Management

A

B

483

A

B

Figure 23-6 A, Bilateral complete cleft lip and palate in

which the maxillary six permanent anterior teeth have been
removed. B, Removable prosthodontic appliance providing
acceptable occlusal and aesthetic results.

commitment to the oral cavity because this specialist fabricates prosthetic appliances to rehabilitate mastication,
deglutition, speech, and oral aesthetics.
Many patients with clefts have congenitally missing
teeth or malformed teeth that may need to be removed.
In these cases masticatory function, speech, and orofacial aesthetics are compromised, and successful habilitation dictates that the missing teeth be replaced to achieve
as nearly normal a condition as possible (Fig. 23-6). The
maxillofacial prosthodontist may do this with fixed or removable appliances or with a combination of the two.
Occasionally, patients demonstrate aberrant speech
patterns caused by failure of the soft palate to elevate
properly. If surgical soft palate reconstruction and revision are unsuccessful, a palatal lift appliance can be fabricated to aid the speech mechanism. In other cases the
maxillofacial prosthodontist may fabricate a speech bulb
prosthesis to aid or augment the velopharyngeal mechanism. In patients with considerable escape of air through
persistent palatal fistulas, the fistulas can be surgically repaired or obturated (Fig. 23-7).

MEDICAL AND ALLIED HEALTH SPECIALTIES
The patient care coordinator arranges appointments,
maintains patient records, and monitors the interaction
of the patient and family with the various team members.

C
Figure 23-7 A, Diagnostic maxillary model of a bilateral

complete cleft lip and palate. Notice the large patent oronasal fistula that resulted after several attempts to close the
defect surgically. B, Maxillary prosthesis constructed for the
patient to obturate the palatal defect. C, Palatal prosthesis
in place. This closure provides a reduction in the amount of
fluids and foods that enter the nasal cavity during eating.
The closure also facilitates more normal speech production.

The coordinator corresponds with health and school personnel near the patient’s home to help provide continuity
of care for the cleft patients within the community. The
coordinator is the most convenient point of contact with
team members for the patients, their families, and health
care practitioners outside the medical center complex.
The pediatrician, often the patient’s own pediatrician
or family physician, is responsible for maintenance of the
patient’s overall health. This specialist performs complete

484

Chapter 23

n

Multidisciplinary Team Approach to Cleft Lip and Palate Management

physical evaluations and helps assess the patient’s physiologic status. Close attention is also directed to growth
status and other developmental milestones.
The medical geneticist examines the patient to find
characteristics of syndromes associated with cleft lip and
palate. Consideration is given to the genetic basis for the
anomaly, and this information is related to the parents.
Genetic counseling is a very important function of the
geneticist. Parents are vitally interested in risk assessment
relative to future offspring, and other family members
who may be at risk are often counseled (see Chapter 5).
The role of the plastic and reconstructive surgeon begins with a determination of the timing and method of
lip closure. In addition, the plastic surgeon is responsible
for cleft palate repair and secondary surgery to correct velopharyngeal incompetence and/or palatal fistulas. Internal and external cleft nasal deformities are corrected by
the plastic surgeon.
The social worker acts as the patient’s advocate in
many cases and aids in psychosocial assessment. This
team member assists the family by making referrals to
persons or agencies at the local, county, and state levels
for guidance regarding financial resources for medical
care. During hospitalization, the social worker provides
supportive counseling and facilitates communication
between the family and medical or hospital personnel.
The focus is on helping the family cope with stress during
and after surgery and on dealing with emotional factors
involved in forming realistic expectations of surgical outcomes and in adapting to problems of body image.
The psychiatrist and psychologist evaluate the patient
for strengths and weaknesses in cognitive, interpersonal,
emotional, behavioral, and social development. Emphasis
is placed on the patient’s ability to cope with the emotional and physical stress created by the cleft defect. Consultation with the parents and school regarding educational or
behavioral management occurs when indicated.
The speech pathologist functions essentially as a monitor of speech output. All speech sounds are analyzed to
determine deviations from normal, and the cause of any
deviation is evaluated. To the extent that anatomic variations are corrected, the speech pathologist offers therapeutic options to enhance maturation of speech or to
achieve satisfactory compensation in motor production
for optimal speech.
The audiologist performs tests to identify any hearing difficulties. When neither the child nor the parents
recognize hearing problems, the result can be a delay in
speech and language development and poor performance
in school. When hearing tests or impedance measures are
abnormal, a referral is made to an otolaryngologist for an
ear examination. The otolaryngologist coordinates audiology tests and any special studies that may be needed
to evaluate middle ear structures. Any middle ear surgery
that is to be done is performed by this member of the
team. He or she may also perform a nasopharyngoscopic
examination in coordination with the speech pathologist.
Nurses provide various functions that are valuable to the
cleft lip and palate team. They actively communicate with
other disciplines in relaying information regarding the special needs of each child and family. Nurses emphasize total

family involvement and not just treatment of the patient.
They prepare patients and families for either outpatient
or inpatient surgery and assist in the overall management
process. Above all, they are extremely important in assessing the initial feeding issues and advising parents about ongoing nutritional concerns.
The presence of more complex craniofacial anomalies,
such as Crouzon syndrome, Treacher-Collins syndrome,
or hemifacial microsomia, requires additional specialists
on the team. Some of these care providers include anesthesiologists, diagnostic medical imaging radiologists,
neurologists, neurosurgeons, and ophthalmologists in addition to those cleft team providers already mentioned.

MULTIDISCIPLINARY SEQUENCING
OF TREATMENT IN CLEFTS
The following discussion focuses on major treatment
procedures performed by members of the cleft team. For
convenience, the treatment is divided into four stages,
which generally correspond to stages in the child’s dental
development.

STAGE I (INFANT APPLIANCE STAGE: BIRTH TO
18 MONTHS OF AGE)
Management of the patient with a cleft begins with immediate attention to the needs of the newborn. Feeding
problems are often associated with cleft anomalies, particularly clefting of the palate, which make it difficult for the
infant to maintain adequate nutrition. These problems
include insufficient suction to pull milk from the nipple,
excessive air intake during feeding (requiring several
burpings), choking, nasal discharge, and excessive time
required to take nourishment. The clinical nurse specialist on the cleft team or the feeding specialist is contacted
to assess the feeding issues and offer advice and support.
Various feeding techniques as well as feeding bottles/supplies have been advocated for use by infants with clefts.6
In the past, McNeil7,8 and other authors since then
have advocated various prosthetic appliances, both active
and passive, for the treatment of infants born with unilateral and bilateral clefts of the lip and palate. One such
prosthesis, an intraoral maxillary obturator, has proved
beneficial by providing an artificial palate. The ­advantages
of this prosthetic therapy include the following:
  
1.	Provides a false palate against which the infant can
suck, reduces the incidence of feeding difficulties in
newborns, and helps maintain adequate nutrition
2.	Provides maxillary cross-arch stability and prevents
arch collapse after definitive cheiloplasty (surgical
closure of the lip)
3.	Provides maxillary orthopedic molding of the cleft
segments into approximation before primary alveolar
cleft bone grafting
  
In a study by Jones, maxillary obturators were constructed to facilitate feeding for 51 infants with unilateral
or bilateral cleft lip and palate.9 From birth, each infant
had continuously experienced feeding difficulties before
obturator therapy. After the infants had worn the obturator for at least 8 months, parents reported that they
were more comfortable while feeding their infants and

Chapter 23

n

Multidisciplinary Team Approach to Cleft Lip and Palate Management

that nasal discharge was reduced. The time required for
feeding and the difficulty experienced by the parents were
also reduced. Of particular importance was the reported
reduction of parental apprehension during feeding. All
parents recommended the obturator for others who have
infants with cleft lip and palate. It was also reported that
the weights of the infants at 1, 3, and 6 months of age
consistently remained at, or above, the 50th percentile
compared with normative growth data. No fluctuation in
weight was noted even after primary lip closure at about
3 months of age.

Impression Technique and Feeding Obturator
Construction
As soon as possible (usually within 2 weeks of birth),
an impression is made of the infant’s maxillary arch for
construction of an intraoral obturator. An alginate impression of the infant’s maxillary arch is made with a
­modified stock tray. Ideally, this is accomplished as soon
after birth as possible. The infant is held upright during
the impression process to prevent aspiration of excess
material (Fig. 23-8). Appropriate emergency equipment,
including forced oxygen, suction, and standard airway

485

management equipment, should be available. The impression should exhibit good anatomic detail with coverage of the entire maxillary arch (Fig. 23-9). A stone model
is then produced. The steps in obturator construction are
as follows:
  
1.	Block out excessive undercuts with modeling dough
or wax. Modeling dough is preferred because it is easy
to remove from the finished prosthesis.
2.	Apply a tinfoil substitute over the entire surface of the
maxillary model and let it dry.
3.	If necessary, place a dam of modeling dough on the
back of the model to hold the resin in the palatal
defect while it cures.
4.	Pour a mixture of soft, autopolymerizing acrylic resin
into the cleft to the level of the palate. This provides
retention for the prosthesis by gently contouring into
the available undercuts (Fig. 23-10).
5.	Place the model in a warm, moist environment to
cure for 20 minutes.

Figure 23-9 Final impression of the infant’s maxillary arch.

Notice the extension of the material into the cleft defect,
as well as the roll produced in the buccal fold. Attention
to such detail ensures an excellent reproduction of the intraoral architecture for obturator construction.

Figure 23-8 Maxillary impression for obturator construc-

tion on a newborn with a cleft lip and palate. The infant is
held in an upright position to prevent aspiration of excess
material.

Figure 23-10 Application of soft, autopolymerizing resin

into the cleft to the level of the palate. This material provides increased retention of the obturator by contouring
into the cleft. Notice the dam of modeling dough, which
aids in the placement of the resin.

486

Chapter 23

n

Multidisciplinary Team Approach to Cleft Lip and Palate Management

Figure 23-11 Maxillary model at the completion of the

application of autopolymerizing acrylic resin. The obturator
is allowed to cure for 20 minutes and then is trimmed and
polished. Notice the extension of the resin into the mucobuccal fold. This extension further increases the retention of
the prosthesis.
6.	Add autopolymerizing acrylic resin to the palate
using a “salt and pepper” method, making sure the
acrylic resin extends well into the mucobuccal fold
area (Fig. 23-11).
7.	Remove the appliance from the model, and rinse the
wax and modeling dough off with hot water. Then
trim and polish the appliance.

Clinical Management of Initial Obturator Therapy
The appliance is positioned in the infant’s mouth
(Fig. 23-12). Areas of excessive pressure exerted by the
acrylic resin on any intraoral tissues are identified by
observation and then reduced. Care is taken to keep the
acrylic resin from impinging on muscle attachments or
extending to the depth of the buccal vestibule. Parents
are instructed in placement and removal of the appliance and its daily cleaning. Infants are usually seen for
adjustments 2 days after appliance delivery. After delivery of the obturator, the infant is allowed to become
accustomed to the appliance for 1 week. Monthly observations are then scheduled. In most cases, this appliance will serve until the time of initial lip closure
at a
­ pproximately 3 months of age. The major advantage of obturator use during this stage is to enhance the
child’s ability to obtain nourishment.
Not all clinicians who work with infants with cleft
lip and palate advocate the use of prosthetic feeding
appliances. Some believe that such appliances are not
­effective in facilitating feeding. Pashayan and McNab
recommend using a standard nipple that has been crosscut.10 This enlarged cut provides improved ejection of
the milk into the infant’s mouth with a minimum of
effort. Although this recommendation is appropriate
for many infants born with cleft lip and palate, obturator construction may be indicated for children born
with more severe facial deformities. This is especially
important in consideration of the maxillary orthopedic
molding of the alveolar segments after surgical closure
of the lip.

Figure 23-12 Obturator in place on the infant’s maxillary

arch. Notice the extension of the soft resin into the cleft
defect, which provides increased retention. (From Jones JE,
Kerkhof RL: Obturator construction for maxillary orthopedics in cleft lip and palate infants, Quintessence Dent Technol
8:583-586, 1984.)

Presurgical Orthopedics
In some cases of bilateral cleft lip and palate, the infant has
a premaxillary segment positioned severely anterior to the
maxillary arch segments or deviated laterally to one side of
the cleft defect (Fig. 23-13). This presents a difficult clinical
challenge for the surgeon before surgical closure of the lip.
If lip surgery is undertaken with the premaxilla in such an
abnormal position, the chances of lip dehiscence (i.e., lip
separation caused by increased pressure at the suture lines)
are increased. As early as 1686, Hofman described the use of
a head cap and premaxillary strap to reposition the premaxilla.11 Methods of presurgical orthopedics include lip taping
across the upper lip.12 The advantages of this method are
its ease of use; however, it does not afford the same control
of the force direction and therefore cannot be used in all
instances. Newer methods include DynaCleft®, which is a
premade topical approximation device that has been successfully used to mold the upper lip and alveolus and to support the developing nasal tissues prior to cleft lip repair.13
Some researchers have recommended the use of active appliances for the normalization of cleft alveolar segments before initial lip surgery in infants. Latham and
colleagues used a dentomaxillary advancement appliance
to bring unilateral cleft segments into approximation.14
In bilateral clefts, they expanded collapsed lateral cleft
segments and actively retracted the premaxilla into a
more ideal arch form. They postulated that such presurgical maxillary orthopedic procedures make lip surgery
easier and result in less soft-tissue tension following closure. In addition, gingivoperiosteoplasty (GPP) can be facilitated at the time of cleft lip repair. This procedure will
be discussed later in the chapter.
More recently, Grayson and Cutting have promoted
the use of a nasoalveolar molding (NAM) appliance with
a nasal labial extension to shape the nasal cleft cartilage.15
The objective of this presurgical effort is to reduce the severity of the cleft deformity, approximate the alveolar
and lip segments, decrease the nasal base width, elongate
the columella, and attempt to achieve symmetry of the
nasal cartilages (Fig. 23-14). They demonstrated that the

Chapter 23

A

n

Multidisciplinary Team Approach to Cleft Lip and Palate Management

487

B

Figure 23-13 Representative diagnostic models of two clinical presentations in bilateral complete cleft lip and palate. A, Severe
anteroposterior protrusion of the premaxillary segment. B, Severe anteroposterior protrusion of the premaxillary segment with
a lateral deviation.

A

C

B

D

Figure 23-14 A, A 6-week-old infant with a bilateral cleft lip and palate. There is complete bilateral clefting of the palate,
an incomplete cleft lip on the right side, and a complete cleft lip on the left side. The premaxilla is displaced anteriorly
and to the right side. B, A nasoalveolar molding (NAM) that has a left nasal extension designed to give better shaping to
the left nares. The acrylic portion that fits over the palate and premaxilla is designed to bring the premaxilla to the center and back into alignment with the right and left alveolar segments. This is accomplished with selective addition and
removal of acrylic. C, The infant with the NAM appliance in place and active at almost 3 months of age. D, The infant
after lip repair. The premaxilla has been brought into good arch alignment with the alveolar segments. (Photos courtesy
of Jennifer Kugar, DDS, MSD, James Whitcomb Riley Hospital for Children, Craniofacial Anomaly Team.)

488

Chapter 23

n

Multidisciplinary Team Approach to Cleft Lip and Palate Management

aesthetic and functional outcome of the primary lip and
nose surgery is more favorable when NAM is used.16 Critics point out that NAM is labor-intensive and therefore
not a feasible option for many patients and centers. The
benefit of columellar lengthening for patients with bilateral cleft palate is a critical advantage of NAM to nasal
reconstruction. With the use of bilateral nasal stints and
taping techniques, the almost absent columella in bilateral clefts can be nonsurgically elongated before initial
lip and nose surgery. Finally, NAM facilitates GPP at the
time of cleft lip repair. This can be of particular advantage
in patients with complete bilateral cleft lip and palate
because osseous union of the premaxilla with the lesser
segment can prevent further descent of the premaxilla or
collapse of the lesser segments during subsequent facial
development.

Airway Obstruction
Infants with airway obstruction secondary to Pierre Robin
sequence (micrognathia, glossoptosis, and cleft palate)
may require intervention to aid breathing (Fig. 23-15, A).
An obturator with a posterior palatal extension may be
used to reposition the tongue downward and forward out
of the cleft site (see Fig. 23-15, B). Prone positioning, supplemental oxygen, nasopharyngeal tubes, and continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) may also be helpful.
If a nonsurgical approach is unsuccessful, lip-to-tongue
adhesion, mandibular distraction, or tracheostomy may
be necessary.

A

Cheiloplasty
The appearance of an unrepaired wide cleft lip can be
distressing. Some parents feel anxiety, depression, guilt,
or rejection. Lip surgery will significantly improve the
infant’s appearance and may thereby relieve parental apprehensions and enhance their acceptance of the child.
Cleft lip repair is typically performed in infants at
approximately 3 months of age. Primary nasal reconstruction is commonly performed at the time of lip repair. Prior to the start of surgery, when the infant is
under general anesthesia, if an obturator has been necessary, an impression is made of the maxillary arch for
construction of a new obturator. This is necessary to
accommodate craniofacial growth during the first few
months of life.

Maxillary Orthopedics
After definitive lip closure, maxillary arch collapse in
the unilateral or bilateral complete cleft may occur.
This is attributed to the increased tension placed on the
segments by the repaired lip. To prevent this collapse,
an obturator may be used to provide cross-arch stability and support. As pressure is exerted on the anterior
segments of the maxilla by the repaired lip, orthopedic
molding of the segments can be achieved. In unilateral cases, the force applied to the greater segment by
the intact lip molds that segment around to approximate the lesser segment (Fig. 23-16). This molding is
facilitated by the obturator, which provides a fulcrum
around which the anterior portion of the greater segment rotates. At the same time the appliance resists any

B
Figure 23-15 A, Infant with airway obstruction secondary to
Pierre Robin sequence. Notice the closure of the oral airway
related to the retroposition of the tongue. B, Infant with
obturator in position. Notice the anterior placement of the
tongue, which allows the oral airway to remain open.

tendency for the greater and lesser segments to collapse
toward the midline. In bilateral cleft cases the repaired
lip provides further retraction at the premaxilla, positioning it between the two lateral maxillary segments.
When the maxillary segments are in good alignment
and abut across the cleft sites, a primary cleft bone graft
can be considered.

Bone Grafting of Alveolar Cleft Defects
Bone grafting of alveolar cleft defects has been a confusing issue to many patients and practitioners. This stems
in part from the lack of unanimity concerning terminology and technique. The following definitions, which have
been reasonably accepted by practitioners, will be used in
this discussion.

Chapter 23

n

Multidisciplinary Team Approach to Cleft Lip and Palate Management

Figure 23-16 Sequential maxillary arch dental models dem-

onstrating maxillary orthopedic molding in an infant with a
unilateral complete cleft lip and palate. Notice that, as the
cleft defect closes with time, lateral arch dimension is maintained, which produces optimal maxillary arch symmetry.
(From Jones JE et al: Maxillary arch expansion in cleft lip and
palate infants prior to primary autogenous alveolar bone
graft surgery, Quintessence Int 17:245-248, 1986.)
Primary bone grafting refers to bone-grafting procedures involving alveolar cleft defects in children younger
than 2 years of age; this term implies nothing about technique. Secondary bone grafting is usually performed in
the mixed dentition stage, between 9 and 12 years of age.

Primary Alveolar Cleft Bone Grafting
Primary alveolar cleft bone grafting is controversial. The
concept fell into disfavor in the early 1970s amid numerous reports of significant attenuation in midfacial growth.
Use of a primary alveolar cleft bone graft does not necessarily preclude a later secondary alveolar cleft bone graft
if it is indicated. The objectives of a secondary cleft bone
graft can be somewhat different, as will be seen. Although
a recent survey of cleft and craniofacial teams conducted
by the American Cleft Palate–Craniofacial Association reported that only 3% of teams perform primary alveolar
cleft bone grafting, continued critical evaluation of early
alveolar bone grafting and outcomes from cleft centers
utilizing this technique is necessary. A different approach
to normalizing the cleft alveolar segment relationships

489

has been advocated by Huebener and Marsh.17 In their
treatment protocol, which uses the forces created by either lip adhesion or primary lip closure, a passive alveolar molding appliance similar to that used by Rosenstein
is used.18 The passive appliance does not have an acrylic
extension over the alveolar ridges, and it is placed on the
day of the lip surgery. The tension created by lip closure
acts over time on the anterior alveolar cleft segments
(in both unilateral and bilateral clefts) and shapes these
cleft segments around the anterior portion of the molding appliance. The appliance is worn by the infant until
palatoplasty. Usually at that time the cleft segments are
abutting and the torqued maxillary frenum has returned
to the midsagittal plane. In this protocol, no primary alveolar bone grafting is performed.
Another technique that has gained favor in some cleft
centers is gingivoperiosteoplasty (GPP). This technique
takes advantage of the osteogenic properties of infants
rather than grafts to bridge the bony cleft of the alveolus.
Originally described by Skoog,19 GPP has the potential of
restoring the alveolar arch at the time of infancy through
“boneless bone grafting.” Mucoperiosteal flaps are raised,
usually at the time of cleft lip repair, and then sealed
over the alveolar cleft without the use of a primary bone
graft. This procedure requires closure of the nasal floor
at the time of cleft lip repair and anatomic realignment
of the alveolar segments by presurgical orthopedics prior
to reconstruction. Although bone formation is possible
through GPP, the consistency of bone formation and the
avoidance of secondary bone grafting remain areas of active debate. Furthermore, the potential detriment to facial
growth and tooth formation has not been entirely elucidated. Despite these limitations, GPP has been embraced
in several institutions, and this technique remains an area
of active research.

Palatoplasty
Closure of the palate is accomplished by 1 year of age, primarily to facilitate the acquisition of normal speech because this correlates with the age at which most children
begin to talk. The procedure may also improve hearing
and swallowing by aligning the cleft palatal musculature.
Dedicated speech therapy is critical in the years following
surgery to optimize palatal function.
After primary closure of the cleft palate, some patients
may demonstrate velopharyngeal insufficiency requiring
secondary surgery. A persistent inability to close the nasopharynx may result in unsatisfactory speech (nasality and
articulation problems), regurgitation of fluids from the
nose, and facial grimacing. At Indiana University, of the
various surgical approaches to correct velopharyngeal insufficiency, the pharyngeal flap is most commonly used.
Velopharyngeal insufficiency is definitely diagnosed by
nasoendoscopy, and the procedure is generally performed
before the child begins school.

Dental Care
One of the most important aspects of cleft lip and palate
care is infant oral health care. It is during this time that
the American Academy of Pediatric Dentistry advocates
the “age one” dental visit.20 During this visit, the pediatric

490

Chapter 23

n

Multidisciplinary Team Approach to Cleft Lip and Palate Management

Table 23-1
Oral Health Risk Factors for Children with
Oral Facial Clefting21
Caries Risk Factors

Periodontitis Risk Factors

Enamel defects (hypoplasia)
of teeth adjacent to the
cleft site

Poorly developed osseous supports and lack
of proper connective
attachment of teeth associated with the cleft
Abnormalities of size,
shape, and number and
malalignment of teeth
associated with the cleft

Parents who are overwhelmed with numerous
medical needs of the child
such that oral health has a
comparatively low priority
Use of an acrylic obturator
Longer oral clearance times
Permissive parenting, which
may allow a highly
cariogenic diet and
less-than-adequate oral
hygiene home care
Orthodontic appliances,
which impede adequate
hygiene
Significant lip scarring and/
or malalignment of teeth,
which make the cleft area
more difficult to clean
Oral aversion and/or fear of
toothbrushing
Cognitive or motor impairment, which may lead to
ineffective oral hygiene

Inadequate oral hygiene
Orthodontic appliances
Subgingival restorations

Discontinuous and
infrequent periodontal
maintenance

dentist examines the oral cavity, notes any abnormalities
in the soft and hard tissues, and provides anticipatory guidance to the parents regarding oral health care. Also, during
this visit, emphasis is placed on the prevention of oral disease. In particular, this first visit offers parents an opportunity to discuss the many developmental issues unique to
the cleft deformity (Table 23-1).

STAGE II (PRIMARY DENTITION STAGE: 18
MONTHS TO 5 YEARS OF AGE)
Treatment during the primary dentition stage of dental development is initially focused on establishing and
maintaining oral health. Meticulous daily oral hygiene
for the child, with emphasis on direct assistance from the
parents, is established to reduce the possibility of the development of dental caries. Ectopic eruption of the primary maxillary anterior dentition is common around the
cleft defect.
Special care should be taken to keep these teeth free
from caries because food is often lodged in and around
the cleft defect. An increase in the frequency of periodic
recall examinations, possibly to 3- to 4-month intervals,
enables the dentist to intercept areas of decalcification.

This preventive regimen is continued throughout all subsequent stages in the management of the cleft.
In some extensive cases of unilateral and bilateral
complete clefts of the lip and palate, surgical closure is
postponed beyond the usual 12 months of age. In these
cases, because of the development of speech at this age,
maxillary prosthetic appliances are constructed to provide normal maxillary arch integrity (Fig. 23-17). As the
child grows, more tissue will become available to close
the palate.

STAGE III (LATE PRIMARY OR EARLY MIXED
DENTITION STAGE: 6 TO 10 OR 11 YEARS
OF AGE)
Many problems encountered during the late primary and
mixed dentition stages of dental development arise from
ectopically erupting permanent central and lateral incisors or crossbites of the posterior dental segments. Treatment therefore concentrates on correction of a developing
traumatic occlusion and posterior segmental alignment.
Interceptive correction of a traumatic occlusion is essential to prevent destruction of enamel in the involved
dentition (Fig. 23-18). Maxillary expansion to correct posterior segmental collapse is accomplished by routine palatal expansion (Fig. 23-19). This is especially important in
patients who have not undergone primary alveolar cleft
bone grafting. Once the condition is corrected, retention
can be maintained by passive holding appliances.

Secondary Alveolar Cleft Bone Graft
A successful alveolar cleft bone graft satisfies several objectives. In addition to giving bony support for the teeth
adjacent to the cleft and providing bone through which
teeth can erupt, it offers maxillary arch continuity and
aids in closure of the oronasal fistula. It also supports the
alar base of the nose.
Conceptually the technique is not difficult, but technically it can be tedious. There are several approaches to
developing the required soft-tissue flaps, but all seem to
be variations of the technique described by Boyne and
Sands.22 The soft tissue in and adjacent to the cleft side
is incised and elevated so that labial and palatal mucosal leaflets are everted to obtain labial and palatal closure. The tissues lining the cleft are elevated and inverted
into the nose for nasal floor closure. Particulate marrow
and cancellous bone harvested from the iliac crest are
placed into the cleft defect, filling it from the piriform
rim to the alveolar crest before closure of the labial tissues
(Fig. 23-20).
Providing bony support to teeth adjacent to the cleft
site is of paramount importance (Fig. 23-21). In most c­ ases
bone should be grafted into the cleft before orthodontic
tooth alignment is begun. When the cleft is filled with
normal, viable bone, the orthodontist can proceed with
tooth alignment without fear of exposing a root surface
into the cleft site. In fact, after a 2-month healing period,
a tooth can be moved into the newly grafted bone with
the expectation that the bone will respond to the tooth
movement as any normal bone would. Any tooth movement undertaken before the graft is placed could jeopardize the bony support of the teeth adjacent to the cleft.

Chapter 23

n

Multidisciplinary Team Approach to Cleft Lip and Palate Management

491

A
B

C

D

Figure 23-17 A, Intraoral view of a unilateral complete cleft lip and palate. Because of the extensive cleft of the hard and soft
palates, the treatment of choice was prosthodontic obturation of the defect until growth was sufficient to allow for definitive
surgical closure. B, Maxillary arch demonstrating extensive cleft palate requiring an interim prosthesis. C, Interim maxillary
prosthesis in place. This effectively closes the oral cavity from the nasal cavity and facilitates mastication and speech. The appliance is removed daily for cleaning. D, Interim prosthesis in occlusion. The prosthetic anterior teeth provide support of the
upper lip and improve aesthetics.

As a related consideration, grafted bone that obliterates the alveolar cleft also provides bone through which
teeth can erupt. When canines and, in some cases, central
incisors are allowed to erupt before bone grafting, they
often lack adequate periodontal bone support. When
the bone graft precedes permanent tooth eruption, compromised periodontal situations can often be prevented.
El Deeb and colleagues studied the eruption patterns of
canines through grafted bone in alveolar cleft defects.23
They found that canine teeth erupted spontaneously
through the grafted bone but that this eruption may be
later than normal and takes longer. In their study, 27%
of the canines erupted spontaneously. The remainder
required surgical uncovering and orthodontic forces to
accomplish eruption and alignment in the arch. Turvey
and associates found the rate of spontaneous eruption to
be 95%, which represents a significant difference.24 However, the point is that canines can and do erupt through
the grafts. If eruption seems greatly delayed, surgical and
orthodontic intervention is appropriate.
El Deeb and colleagues have recommended that the
graft be placed between 9 and 12 years of age, when the
canine root is one quarter to half formed.23 They reported

that the canine subsequently has normal root development and that morphologic conditions will be unaffected
by the surgical procedure.
Restoring maxillary arch continuity and stabilizing the
maxillary segments represent other major objectives. In
the case of a bilateral cleft, the premaxilla is stabilized as
the bone grafts are incorporated between the premaxilla
and the lateral maxillary segments. In the process, the alveolar ridge contour is restored so that the ability to provide a stable, aesthetic prosthesis is enhanced. There is
often some degree of collapse of the maxillary arch form.
It is possible to expand the arch after grafting, as pointed
out by Boyne and Sands25; however, it is preferable to expand these collapsed segments to as optimal an arch form
as possible before grafting. Pregraft expansion also widens
the cleft site, which allows better access for nasal floor
closure. After the arch expansion has occurred, the bone
graft can be placed. After the graft has been incorporated,
it can be expected to maintain a good arch form.
Closure of the oronasal fistula is often the most significant result of bone graft surgery, according to patients,
who often experience fluid regurgitation into the nose
and mucus drainage from the nose into the oral cavity

492

Chapter 23

n

Multidisciplinary Team Approach to Cleft Lip and Palate Management

A

B

C

D

E

F

Figure 23-18 Interceptive correction, in the mixed dentition, of a full maxillary left crossbite in a complete unilateral cleft lip and

palate. A, Diagnostic models for a unilateral complete cleft lip and palate. Notice the presence of a crossbite extending from the
maxillary left central incisor to the maxillary first permanent molar. B, Occlusal views of maxillary and mandibular models. Notice
the pronounced asymmetry of the maxillary arch. C, Occlusion with fixed appliances in place on the maxillary arch. D, Occlusal
view demonstrating removable W-arch to correct the posterior segmental crossbite. E, Occlusal view demonstrating correction
of posterior crossbite and improved alignment of the maxillary anterior segment. Notice the improved maxillary arch symmetry.
F, Occlusion at the end of interceptive therapy. Notice the correction of the anterior and posterior crossbites. At this time, the
patient is ready for secondary alveolar bone grafting (see text for the description of secondary bone-grafting procedure).

Chapter 23

n

Multidisciplinary Team Approach to Cleft Lip and Palate Management

A

B

C

D

493

Figure 23-19 Interceptive correction, in the primary dentition, of a full maxillary left crossbite in a complete unilateral cleft lip

and palate. A, Occlusion demonstrating a crossbite from the maxillary left primary incisor extending to the second primary
molar. B, Fixed palatal expander in place on the maxillary arch at the completion of expansion. The left primary central incisor, loosened by traumatic occlusion before initiation of therapy, exfoliated during treatment. C, Occlusion at the completion
of interceptive therapy. Notice the correction of the posterior crossbite. D, Placement of a passive maxillary arch-holding appliance to maintain optimal arch symmetry until the time of secondary alveolar bone grafting.
through the fistula. Depending on its size, the fistula can
produce significant speech problems because air escapes
when the patient phonates. Although closure of this fistula can be affected with only soft-tissue closure, Enemark
and associates have indicated that closure is more successful when combined with a bone graft.26
With a cleft maxilla, the cleft extends through the piriform rim beneath the alar base of the nose. As a result,
the alar base on the cleft side is often depressed because
of lack of underlying bony support. Filling the cleft with
bone provides underlying bony support that often elevates the alar base of the nose. Although this may not
entirely correct any existing nasal deformity, it does provide good support over which nasal reconstructive and
revision surgery can be accomplished.
Secondary alveolar cleft bone grafting has been widely accepted. According to several researchers,25,27-31 success rates are generally around 90%. Morbidity includes
pain in the donor site, dehiscence of mucosal flaps, and
partial or complete loss of grafted bone. Infection in
the donor or recipient sites has been rare. There has
been increasing interest in many cleft centers in decreasing the morbidity of secondary alveolar grafts by
replacing iliac bone with growth factors such as bone
morphogenetic protein combined with cadaveric bone

or other nonautogenous implants.32,33 The advantages
to function and decreasing morbidity are topics of active debate. The potential morbidity of placing bone
growth factors in the growing dental arch has prevented many surgeons from embracing this treatment
option.34 Secondary alveolar cleft bone grafting is an
important procedure that greatly facilitates total habilitation. Not only is speech improved but dental, aesthetic, and psychosocial benefits are also to be gained.
It is necessary, again, to emphasize the different objectives of primary and secondary grafting and to reiterate
that they are not mutually exclusive procedures. The
primary graft, over time, may satisfy some or all the
objectives of secondary grafting. However, due to risks
to future facial growth and aesthetics, primary grafting
has been abandoned by most cleft centers in favor of
secondary grafting only.

Effect of Facial Aesthetics on Self-Concept
Appearance helps determine how an individual interacts with society and, in turn, how society perceives
and accepts that individual. Facial aesthetics is especially important to the development of self-concept.
A child born with a serious congenital facial anomaly
may find adaptation difficult. For example, Striker and

494

Chapter 23

n

Multidisciplinary Team Approach to Cleft Lip and Palate Management

A
B

C

D

Figure 23-20 Technique for secondary alveolar cleft bone graft. A, Mucosal incisions outlined. B, Development of palatal

mucoperiosteal flap. C, Closure of palatal mucosa. D, Closure of nasal mucosa within cleft site.

continued

associates have stated that the psychological sequelae
of cleft lip and palate may have as great an impact on
the individual as the physical aspects.34 MacGregor
stressed that, because of society’s emphasis on physical attractiveness and conformity, the role of the face
in interactions with others is such that many problems
associated with cleft lip and palate involve considerations of mental health.35 Revisional surgery to the lip
and nose can be considered at this time to assist in psychosocial development.
Of special importance in the comprehensive dental
management of cleft lip and palate is the dentist’s ability
to provide the young patient with interim prostheses to
improve facial appearance (Fig. 23-22). These can be periodically adjusted to allow for eruption of the developing
dentition. Such treatment, when possible, should begin
before the child starts formal education.

STAGE IV (PERMANENT DENTITION STAGE:
12 TO 18 YEARS OF AGE)
The majority of persons with cleft lip and palate require
some degree of orthodontic management and can be
treated conventionally. Some patients with clefts, however, will require a combined orthodontic-surgical approach
in the permanent dentition to achieve optimal outcome.
Before initiating the indicated therapy, the orthodontist
completes a full diagnostic examination to determine the
status of the patient’s craniofacial development.
Most orthognathic surgical procedures involving the
maxilla and mandible are deferred until the teenage
years, when maximum growth of the jaws has been attained and all permanent teeth except the third molars
have erupted. In boys, surgeons usually delay osteotomies until approximately 17 to 18 years of age; in girls,

Chapter 23

n

Multidisciplinary Team Approach to Cleft Lip and Palate Management

E

F

G

H

495

Figure 23-20, cont’d E, Placement of fresh autogenous bone into the cleft defect. F and G, Reapproximation and closure of
mucoperiosteal flaps. H, The reconstructed maxillary alveolus.

because of earlier maturation, surgery after 15 years of
age is possible. The manner in which the maxilla and
mandible relate to each other spatially after growth is
frequently difficult to predict based on the patient’s appearance as a child. An example is the patient with a
complete bilateral cleft lip and palate who has a protuberant premaxilla at birth. In childhood, the lateral
profile may appear severely convex, and the initial impression is that the patient will require a premaxillary
segment surgical setback. This could be an erroneous
assumption, and corrective surgery could be potentially
deleterious if it is performed at an early age. With time,
many of these persons acquire an essentially normal
lateral facial profile. By the time maximum growth has
been attained, a surprising number of these persons acquire a more normal convex profile.
In some instances children with a cleft with a severely
retrusive maxilla cannot undergo orthodontic correction
with conventional therapy. In these cases the surgical

procedure often used is the LeFort I maxillary advancement with or without setback of the lower jaw. This procedure is not technically feasible until the patient has a
full complement of permanent dentition. The horizontal
cuts to free the maxilla must necessarily be made above
the apexes of the permanent dentition. At times the maxilla will require partition into two or three segments to
achieve full dental restoration. Unerupted cuspids or bicuspids would make this procedure impractical. Therefore
surgery must be deferred until the permanent dentition
has erupted.

Cosmetic Surgery
Major nasal bone surgery may be deferred until the patient is in the early teens and after orthognathic surgery.
These procedures help restore projection, symmetry, refinement, and airflow to the nose. However, cartilaginous
nasal tip asymmetries may be corrected at any time. Additional tip-cartilage revisions may be performed as needed.

496

Chapter 23

n

Multidisciplinary Team Approach to Cleft Lip and Palate Management

A

A

B

B
Figure 23-21 A, Pregraft maxillary occlusal radiograph
demonstrating cleft defect with thin layer of bone over
the distal root surface of the maxillary left central incisor.
The canine has not started to erupt. B, Postgraft maxillary
occlusal radiograph demonstrating consolidation of bone
across the cleft defect. Preliminary orthodontic alignment
has been completed. The canine can be expected to erupt
through the grafted area. (From Nelson CL et al: Indiana’s
craniofacial anomalies team: dentists play an important role,
J Indiana Dent Assoc 65(6):9-13, 1986.)

Common secondary deformities of the repaired unilateral or bilateral cleft lip include an upper lip that is
too long or short, a tight upper lip, a deficiency of the
vermilion tissue, and residual clefts (or notching) of the
lip. Final surgical revision is frequently deferred until
the mid to late teens, to eliminate the variable of future

C
Figure 23-22 A, Plaster model of patient’s maxillary arch
ready for construction of the interim denture. B, Transitional maxillary complete overdenture. Such appliances may
be used several years without replacement. C, Transitional
maxillary overdenture in place. The patient’s self-esteem is
greatly enhanced by his essentially normal facial aesthetics.

Chapter 23

n

Multidisciplinary Team Approach to Cleft Lip and Palate Management

facial growth on the surgical result. It is also prudent
to defer final lip revisions until the completion of any
surgical or orthodontic treatment that will change the
osseous or dental support of the upper lip.

REFERENCES
1.	Parker SE, et al.: Updated National Birth Prevalence estimates
for selected birth defects in the United States, 2004-2006,
Birth Defects Res A Clin Mol Teratol 88(12):1008–1016, 2010.
2.	Harkins CS, et al.: A classification of cleft lip and palate, Plast
Reconstr Surg 29:31–39, 1962.
3.	Veau V: Treatment of the unilateral harelip, Int Dent Congress
8th Trans Paris:126–131, 1931.
4.	American Cleft Palate-Craniofacial Association: Parameters
for the evaluation and treatment of patients with cleft lip/
palate or other craniofacial anomalies, Cleft Palate–Craniofac
J 30(Suppl 1): 2000, revised 2007.
5.	Whitehouse FA: Treatment as a dynamic system, Cleft Palate
J 2:16–27, 1965.
6.	Chibbaro P, Barzilai J, Breen M: Nursing care of the patient
with a cleft lip and palate. In Loose J, Kirschner R, editors:
Comprehensive cleft care, New York, 2009, McGraw-Hill, pp
150–167.
7.	McNeil CK: Oral and facial deformity, London, 1954, Pittman.
8.	McNeil CK: Congenital oral deformities, Br Dent J 101:191–
198, 1956.
9.	Jones JE: The use and clinical effectiveness of the maxillary obturator appliance in cleft lip and palate infants: birth through
six months of age [Doctoral dissertation], San Jose, Costa Rica,
2003, Empresarial University.
10.	Pashayan HM, McNab M: Simplified method of feeding
infants with cleft palate with or without cleft lip, Am J Dis
Child 133:145–147, 1979.
11.	Hofman JP: De labiis leoporinis/von Hasen-Scharten, Heidelberg, 1686, Bergmann.
12.	Pool R, Farnworth TK: Preoperative lip taping in the cleft lip,
Ann Plast Surg 32(3):243–249, 1994.
13.	Monasterio L, et al.: Comparative study of nasoalveolar
molding methods: nasal elevator plus DynaCleft® versus
NAM-Grayson in patients with complete unilateral cleft lip
and palate, Cleft Palate Craniofac J 50(5):548–554, 2013.
14.	Latham RA, et al.: An extraorally activated expansion appliance for cleft palate infants, Cleft Palate J 13:253–261,
1976.
15.	Grayson BH, Cutting CB: Presurgical nasoalveolar orthopedic molding in primary correction of the nose, lip, and alveolus of infants born with unilateral and bilateral clefts, Cleft
Palate Craniofac J 38:193–198, 2001.
16.	Barillas I, et al.: Nasoalveolar molding improves long-term
nasal symmetry in complete unilateral cleft lip-cleft palate
patients, Plast Reconstr Surg 123:1002–1006, 2009.

497

17.	Huebener DV, Marsh JL: A survey of early management of
cleft lip and palate—the first 18 months, Unpublished data
presented at the American Cleft Palate–Craniofacial Annual
Meeting, 2002.
18.	Rosenstein SW: Orthodontic and bone grafting procedures
in a cleft lip and palate series: an interim cephalometric evaluation, Angle Orthod 45:227–237, 1975.
19.	Skoog T: The use of periosteum and Surgicel for bone restoration in congenital clefts of the maxilla, Scand J Plast Surg
1:113–130, 1967.
20.	American Academy of Pediatric Dentistry: Guideline on infant oral health care, In American Academy of Pediatric Dentistry Reference Manual 2008-9, Chicago, 2009, American
Academy of Pediatric Dentistry, pp 90–92.
21.	Wells M: Oral health status of children with craniofacial
anomalies, Pediatr Dent 35(3):E79–E86, 2013.
22.	Boyne PJ, Sands NR: Secondary bone grafting of residual alveolar and palatal clefts, J Oral Surg 30:87–92, 1972.
23.	El Deeb M, et al.: Canine eruption into grafted bone in maxillary alveolar cleft defects, Cleft Palate J 19:9–16, 1982.
24.	Turvey TA, et al.: Delayed bone grafting in the cleft maxilla
and palate: a retrospective multidisciplinary analysis, Am J
Orthod 86:244–256, 1984.
25.	Boyne PJ, Sands NR: Combined orthodontic surgical management of residual palato-alveolar cleft defects, Am J Orthod
70:20–37, 1976.
26.	Enemark H, et al.: Secondary bone grafting in unilateral cleft
lip and palate patients: indications and treatment procedure,
Int J Oral Surg 14:2–10, 1985.
27.	Bertz JE: Bone grafting of alveolar clefts, J Oral Surg 39:
874–877, 1981.
28.	Hall HD, Posnick JC: Early results of secondary bone grafts in
106 alveolar clefts, J Oral Maxillofac Surg 41:289–294, 1983.
29.	Kortebein MJ, Nelson CL, Sadove AM: Retrospective analysis
of 135 secondary alveolar cleft bone grafts, J Oral Maxillofac
Surg 49:493–498, 1991.
30.	Kwon HJ, et al.: The management of alveolar cleft defects,
J Am Dent Assoc 102:848–853, 1981.
31.	Troxell JB, Fonseca RJ, Osbon DB: A retrospective study of alveolar cleft grafting, J Oral Maxillofac Surg 40:721–725, 1982.
32.	Canan LW Jr, et al.: Human bone morphogenetic protein-2
use for maxillary reconstruction in cleft lip and palate patients, J Craniofac Surg 23(6):1627–1633, 2012.
33.	Dickinson BP, et al.: Reduced morbidity and improved healing with bone morphogenic protein-2 in older patients with
alveolar cleft defects, Plast Reconstr Surg 121(1):209–217,
2008.
34.	Striker G, et al.: Psychosocial aspects of craniofacial disfigurement: a “state of the art” assessment conducted by the Craniofacial Anomalies Program Branch, the National Institute
of Dental Research, Am J Orthod 76:410–422, 1979.
35.	MacGregor FC: Social and psychological implications of dentofacial disfigurement, Angle Orthod 40:231–233, 1970.

CHAPTER

24

Prosthodontic Treatment
of the Adolescent Patient
s David T. Brown and Mathew T. Kattadiyil

For additional resources, please visit the

website.

CHAPTER OUTLINE
RESTORATION OF SINGLE
MALFORMED, DISCOLORED,
OR FRACTURED TEETH
All-Ceramic and Metal-Ceramic
Crowns
Teeth with Pulpal Involvement

S

FIXED PARTIAL DENTURES
Resin-Bonded Retainers
Complete Crown Retainers
Fixed Partial Denture Pontics
REMOVABLE PARTIAL DENTURES
OVERDENTURES

cientific advancements in the areas of preventive
dentistry, access to and use of dental services, water fluoridation, topical application of fluorides,
and new commercial preventive dentistry products have
led to substantial reductions in the incidence of dental
diseases in developed countries. However, Caplan and
Weintraub determined that adolescents are still affected
by caries, particularly those who are minorities, are rural inhabitants, have minimal fluoride exposure, and are
from less educated and less affluent families.1 Results of a
health and nutrition survey reported by Vargas and colleagues also support a higher caries prevalence among
lower-income children and minorities.2 Assessments of
periodontal health by Barmes and Leous3 show a decrease
in the severity of periodontal disease.
Dental trauma continues to be a significant problem
among adolescents, as supported by Gift and Bhat’s assessment of orofacial injury4 and by Bader and colleagues’
estimates of the incidence and consequences of tooth
fracture.5 In addition, bulimia, anorexia, and dietary habits have led to an increase in the erosion of tooth structure among teenagers, particularly in girls.
Some of the aesthetic treatment needs resulting from
these conditions can be managed with resin-bonding
procedures and porcelain laminate veneers, and, whenever possible, these should be considered as first-choice
treatments. When these procedures have not provided a
satisfactory result or when teeth are missing, then prosthodontics such as single crowns, fixed partial dentures, implant prostheses, or removable prostheses are indicated.
Because adolescents are often affected psychologically
by the unacceptable appearance of diseased, damaged, or
missing teeth, one should not allow chronologic age to
preclude performance of whatever treatment is necessary
to provide proper function and aesthetics.6 If the teeth involved are fully erupted, have achieved complete root formation, and may be prepared without causing irreversible

498

IMPLANT PROSTHESES
Implant Usage Before Growth
Completion
Implants for Orthodontic Anchorage
RECARE PROGRAM
PROTECTIVE MOUTHGUARDS

damage to the pulp, successful prosthodontic treatment
can often be provided for patients as young as 12 to 14
years of age. Patient cooperation, however, is mandatory
during and after treatment. Adolescent patients must be
able to tolerate long appointments and remain still for
extended periods while teeth are being prepared and impression materials are setting. Also, they must be able to
achieve and maintain good oral hygiene around both the
provisional and definitive restorations, as well as in the
rest of the mouth. All these conditions make it highly
desirable for the necessary treatment to be performed as
expeditiously as possible. Finally, it must be understood
that an adolescent is more likely to sustain trauma to the
oral structures than is an adult; thus there is greater risk
of damage to restorations and prostheses than in an adult
patient.
Prosthodontic treatment of the adolescent patient often requires highly intricate procedures that go beyond
the scope of this chapter. The goal of this chapter is to
offer the reader an opportunity to develop a better appreciation of the achievable and available solutions for
the young patient with a prosthodontic need. The interested reader should consult the prosthodontic literature
and current textbooks on fixed, removable, and implant
prosthodontics for more detailed information in this area
of dentistry.

RESTORATION OF SINGLE MALFORMED,
DISCOLORED, OR FRACTURED TEETH
ALL-CERAMIC AND METAL-CERAMIC CROWNS
Crowns are indicated only when more conservative treatments cannot be performed or have proven to be unsuccessful. All-ceramic crowns are the most aesthetic full
coverage crown restorations currently available in dentistry.
The achievement of optimal longevity with all-ceramic

Chapter 24

crowns requires normal tooth preparation form because
the prepared tooth must provide support for the restoration. Therefore, if a large portion of tooth structure is
missing because of trauma or caries or if previous restorations become dislodged during tooth reduction, then
a separate restoration that is well retained in remaining
tooth structure should be placed to establish an ideal
preparation form (Fig. 24-1). Also, the fracture resistance
of all-ceramic crowns is enhanced when other characteristics are present. Occlusal forces should be average or
below average. The centric occlusal contacts should ideally be located over the concave lingual portion of the
prepared tooth and not cervical to the cingulum, where
fracture of the crown is more likely to occur. The prepared
tooth should possess average or greater incisocervical
length and should not be short, round, or overtapered.
The tooth preparation for an all-ceramic crown (Fig.
24-2) should possess a well-defined, smooth finish line
that is 0.8 mm deep around the entire tooth, with the
axial surfaces reduced to a depth of 0.8 mm. The lingual
reduction for occlusal clearance should be 1 mm. An incisal edge reduction of 1.5 to 2 mm is required and is biologically acceptable even in the presence of large pulps.
The use of resin cement and associated dentin bonding
is recommended because crown strength is significantly
improved. Both chamfer and shoulder finish lines can be
used in conjunction with resin cement without compromising restoration strength. If zinc phosphate or glassionomer cement is used, however, then a shoulder finish
line should be used to optimize crown strength.
When the ideal tooth preparation form is seriously
compromised or the magnitude of occlusal forces contraindicates restoration with an all-ceramic crown, use of
the stronger metal-ceramic crown is indicated. The tooth
preparation design and reduction depths for a metalceramic crown are shown in Figure. 24-3. When cervical
aesthetics must be optimized in a metal-ceramic restoration, one can use a collarless design that eliminates facial
cervical metal and uses a porcelain facial margin (Figs.
24-4 and 24-5).
Whenever possible, cervical margins should not be extended into the gingival sulcus of an adolescent patient. If
oral hygiene is inadequate, subgingival margins may produce accelerated gingival recession or interfere with the
normal cervical relocation of the gingival tissues as the
patient matures. Both occurrences produce an aesthetic
liability (Figs. 24-6 and 24-7).

n

Prosthodontic Treatment of the Adolescent Patient

A

B
Figure 24-1 A, Traumatically injured central and lateral

incisors that have been restored with bonded resins and
then prepared to receive all-ceramic crowns. B, All-ceramic
crowns have been cemented.

0.8
mm
1.0
1.5

Figure 24-2 Two views of all-ceramic (porcelain jacket

crown) preparation showing recommended reduction
depths and shoulder finish line.

0.30.5

TEETH WITH PULPAL INVOLVEMENT
When tooth fracture or caries involves the pulp and root
development is complete, a routine pulpectomy and gutta-percha root canal filling should be completed. Because
posts and cores do not strengthen endodontically treated
teeth, their use is indicated only when the remaining coronal tooth structure does not provide adequate retention
for definitive restoration. Restorations that do not use a
post should be used whenever possible to replace missing
tooth structure and serve as a retentive foundation. It is
particularly important that the teeth in the mouths of accident-prone adolescents or in whom athletic trauma has
previously occurred be restored without a post, if possible.

499

1.0
mm

1.0
2.0

Figure 24-3 Two views of metal-ceramic crown preparation

showing minimal facial reduction and shoulder finish line,
minimal incisal reduction, lingual axial reduction depth
and chamfer finish line, and lingual reduction for occlusal
clearance.

500

Chapter 24

n

Prosthodontic Treatment of the Adolescent Patient

A

B

C

Figure 24-4 Collarless metal-ceramic framework design that

eliminates visible cervical metal. A indicates porcelain; B indicates the underlying metal framework that does not cover
shoulder finish line; and C is the margin where porcelain
comes into contact only with the prepared tooth.

A

Figure 24-7 Accelerated gingival recession around maxillary

left central incisor resulting from metal-ceramic crown with
subgingival margins placed at a young age. The gingiva is
edematous and red, and the gingival margin is rounded
and thick.

This practice helps avoid irreparable damage in the form
of root fracture in case the restored tooth is once again
subjected to trauma. Even though trauma may result in
restoration dislodgement or perhaps even fracture of the
tooth, the tooth will have survived at least one more traumatic experience.
In the case of pulpal involvement when the root is incompletely formed, a pulpotomy followed by placement
of an appropriate restoration is indicated. Subsequently,
when root formation is completed, a pulpectomy is performed, followed by placement of the definitive restoration or crown, if needed.

FIXED PARTIAL DENTURES
B
Figure 24-5 A, The maxillary lateral incisor was traumati-

cally injured, resulting in loss of the incisal one third and
much of the lingual surface. The tooth has been prepared
for a metal-ceramic crown with a porcelain margin (collarless metal-ceramic crown). B, The lateral incisor crown has
been cemented.

Figure 24-6 Gingival contour in 25-year-old patient result-

ing from placement of subgingival crown on maxillary right
central incisor at 8 years of age. The gingival crest is not
positioned as far apically on the restored central incisor, and
its form is rounded and thick rather than the normal form of
the gingival margin, which is thinner and sharper.

When a tooth is lost, space maintenance should be provided immediately after extraction to prevent tipping,
tilting, or rotation of the abutment teeth or eruption of
the opposing teeth. Space maintenance should be continued until the fixed prosthesis is completed. If the abutment teeth are malaligned and pulp size does not permit the amount of tooth reduction necessary to align the
preparations, orthodontic repositioning of the abutment
teeth should be initiated.
The use of conventional fixed partial dentures, requiring complete crown tooth preparations, is decreasing in
adult patients due to the use of dental implants and occurs only sparsely in adolescents. Contemporary treatment planning more frequently indicates that an interim
fixed or removable prosthesis be used until such time as
growth is completed and dental implants can be placed.
When an interim fixed prosthesis is needed, resin-bonded
fixed partial dentures are a good choice. When implants
will not be used or have not been successful, fixed partial dentures become an appropriate definitive treatment.
These fixed partial dentures can use conventional complete crown retainers, or they can use resin-bonded retainers designed for long-term service.

RESIN-BONDED RETAINERS
For reasons of pulpal and periodontal health and conservation of tooth structure, resin-bonded retainers are

Chapter 24

frequently used to replace missing teeth when dental
implants are not being used (Fig. 24-8). Retention and
resistance form is achieved through tooth preparations,
terminating in enamel, coupled with acid-etching of the
enamel and fixation with resin cement. The conservative
approach of using resin-bonded retainers, however, does
require that the abutment teeth be intact or minimally
restored, with substantial enamel present for bonding
procedures. To produce an adequate area for resin bonding, the existing crown should be of average or greater
length. A maximal amount of the invisible portions of the
lingual and proximal surfaces should be covered by the
retainers to increase bonding surface area. The existing
crown form, color, and axial alignment must be satisfactory because this prosthesis design does not permit the incorporation of changes in the facial enamel of abutment
teeth. When abutment crown contours or color requires
aesthetic changes, then complete crown retainers may
produce a superior result.
These prostheses can be successful for many years, but
suitable attention must be paid to four factors: (1) appropriate diagnosis and treatment planning, (2) correct tooth
preparation, (3) good-fitting castings, and (4) meticulous
adherence to the required resin-bonding procedures.
Several factors important to diagnosis and treatment
planning have been identified. Prostheses with only one
pontic have much higher success rates, so the use of longspan prostheses should be avoided. Multiple splinted retainers are associated with higher failure rates. The use of
resin-bonded cantilevered prostheses (with only one retainer) has been reported, and analysis of data from Hussey and
associates7 and Leempoel and colleagues8 indicates that this
type of design can be used successfully in certain situations
such as a missing maxillary lateral incisor (Fig. 24-9).
Preparation of abutment teeth for resin-bonded prostheses is not recommended for prostheses that will be
used only on an interim basis. However, when long-term
service is needed, tooth preparation has been found to
substantially reduce debonding of retainers.
Barrack and Bretz determined that the successful use of
resin-bonded prostheses requires establishment of retention and resistance form through tooth preparation (see
Fig. 24-9, B and Fig. 24-10).9 Because the tooth preparation is limited principally to enamel, these retainers can
be used without pulpal damage and the teeth can often be
prepared without anesthesia. The proximal surfaces adjacent to the edentulous area should be reduced to remove
interproximal undercuts and to provide parallel surfaces
that aid retention. One or two proximal grooves must be
placed to enhance the resistance and retention form (see
Fig. 24-10, A). Proximal grooves have been identified as
a key factor in the resistance to debonding.10 The tooth
preparation should include a small peripheral chamfer
finish line (see Fig. 24-10, B) formed with the tip of a
rounded-end diamond instrument. The lingual surfaces
of anterior teeth are reduced to create occlusal clearance
with the opposing teeth. The minimal occlusal clearance
space for short-span (three-unit) prostheses with normal
occlusal forces is 0.5 mm. It may not be necessary to reduce the abutment teeth lingually when there is existing
occlusal clearance, whereas reduction of opposing teeth

n

Prosthodontic Treatment of the Adolescent Patient

501

A

B
Figure 24-8 A, Congenitally missing maxillary lateral inci-

sors. B, Resin-bonded prostheses were used instead of
conventionally cemented prostheses to preserve as much
tooth structure as possible on the central incisor and canine
abutments.

may be necessary when occlusal contact occurs over
broad areas of the lingual surfaces. Multiple ledges, prepared across the reduced lingual surface (see Fig. 24-10,
C), increase the casting rigidity and, along with the proximal grooves, aid in retention and resistance form and in
orientation of the casting during cementation.
The preparation of posterior abutment teeth should
include reduction of the proximal surfaces to eliminate
undercuts and to produce minimal occlusal convergence
for retention and resistance form. The reduction should
also include lingual surfaces and at least 180° of circumferential reduction, as determined by Creugers and colleagues.11 One or two proximal grooves are placed, one or
two occlusal rest seats are prepared,9 and a small chamfer
finish line is formed. The use of an inlay-like occlusal rest
has been advocated to increase resistance and retention
form. The occlusal aspect of the lingual cusp can also be
slightly reduced and covered with metal to increase the
bonding area and prosthesis retention (Fig. 24-11).
A metal-ceramic alloy is used for the prosthesis framework, which allows porcelain to be bonded over the visible
facial surfaces of pontics to meet aesthetic requirements.
Several design variations are used for the retainer castings,
differing in the manner in which the resin mechanically

502

Chapter 24

n

Prosthodontic Treatment of the Adolescent Patient

B

A

C
Figure 24-9 A, Congenitally missing maxillary lateral incisor. B, Incisal view of the bonded two-unit prosthesis where the lat-

eral incisor pontic has been cantilevered from the maxillary canine. C, Facial view of the completed prosthesis.

interlocks with the surface of the casting that comes into
contact with the prepared teeth.
The first prosthesis design featured retainer castings
that were perforated lingually, which allowed resin to encompass the casting. Subsequently, a technique was introduced that used a base metal alloy and thereby took
advantage of the ability of the alloy to be acid-etched to
provide microscopic areas of retention (Fig. 24-12). This
technique is not suitable for use with gold-containing alloys because they cannot be etched in this manner.
An alternative method of treating the metal surface to
provide retention for the resin is to subject the bonding
surface to airborne-particle abrasion with 50-μm aluminum oxide. This method provides retention comparable
with that of chemically etched metal and can be used
with any casting alloy.12
The completed prosthesis is first trial-seated so that any
required adjustments of form, color, occlusion, and glaze
can be completed. The prosthesis should then be cleaned
ultrasonically to remove debris that may be present in
the retentive areas and dried thoroughly with clean, dry,
compressed air.
Cementation of the prosthesis with the acid-etching
and resin procedure requires optimal moisture control,
which is best obtained with use of a rubber dam. Composite resins specially designed for cementation of this
type of prosthesis are used. After isolation of the prepared
teeth (Fig. 24-13), the enamel is acid-etched in the usual
manner, rinsed, and dried. The resin is applied to the casting and the prosthesis seated (see Fig. 24-13, B). Excess
cement is quickly removed, and the prosthesis is held

motionless until polymerization is complete. Resin cement
left in interproximal undercut areas until hard can be
very difficult to remove.
Opaque resins can be used to help mask the metal
when abutment teeth are very translucent. This procedure helps reduce the darkening effect of lingual metal
showing through the incisal aspect of a tooth. Also, when
adequate bonding area is present lingually, it may be possible to reduce the area of retainer coverage by cutting
away lingual metal before cementation so that none is
located behind thin translucent areas of the tooth.
Fiber-reinforced composite-resin fixed partial dentures
have also proved to be a predictable aesthetic treatment
alternative to metal-ceramic resin-bonded retainers and
are worthy of consideration as interim long-term restorations when aesthetics is a priority.13

COMPLETE CROWN RETAINERS
When a resin-bonded retainer cannot be used because
of the tooth condition, crown form, crown length, axial
alignment, occlusal forces, or conditions requiring maximal retention and resistance form, use of complete crown
retainers is indicated.
Cast metal retainers should be used posteriorly wherever aesthetically possible because they require less tooth
reduction than a metal-ceramic retainer. When short
clinical crowns are encountered, it may be necessary to
use auxiliary grooves or boxes in the axial surfaces to
achieve the required degree of retention and resistance
form. It may also be necessary to perform a gingivoplasty
so that more tooth structure is exposed.

Chapter 24

A

B

n

Prosthodontic Treatment of the Adolescent Patient

503

When aesthetic requirements demand and pulp size
permits, metal-ceramic restorations are indicated. When
complete crown retainers are indicated but pulp size allows only minimal reduction, an all-resin fixed prosthesis may be the best choice. The all-resin restoration offers
good aesthetics initially and requires only minimal axial
tooth reduction (0.5 mm), but because it has less wear
resistance, strength, and color stability than porcelain, it
must be replaced periodically. All-resin prostheses rarely
last more than a few years without significant wear, color
change, or fracture. If the casts and records are retained,
however, additional replacement prostheses can be made
and several additional years of service obtained. Subsequent treatment may permit the use of metal-ceramic
retainers because enough pulpal recession may have occurred facilitating safe additional tooth reduction. The
development of new resins and fiber reinforcement may
extend the longevity of such prostheses.
Complete crown retainers can also be used in conjunction with cantilevered prostheses so that tooth preparation is limited to one tooth. Schwartz and associates14 and
Foster15 have shown use of the cantilever design to be a
viable treatment alternative. The absence of a maxillary
lateral incisor, which is encountered in adolescents because of congenital abnormality, is a situation well suited
to this design. A two-unit fixed prosthesis can be fabricated with a lateral incisor pontic cantilevered from the
canine retainer. The positional stability of the canine is
important to the success of this design. The canine should
not be mobile, and the arch form should be stable (i.e.,
teeth have not shifted and are not shifting position). The
canine should not have recently undergone orthodontic
repositioning that involved significant rotation. A final
note: While these are for the primary dentition, the availability of commercially available pre-veneered aesthetic
stainless steel crowns has added an additional potential
restorative option when aesthetics is a concern and full
coverage is necessary.16,17

FIXED PARTIAL DENTURE PONTICS

C
Figure 24-10 A, The maxillary canine has been isolated for
prosthesis cementation with the use of a rubber dam, which
affords a good view of the well-defined proximal grooves.
B, Cast of prepared maxillary central incisor and canine.
Note the small peripheral chamfer, the lingual ledges, and
the small proximal grooves. C, Another patient in whom the
maxillary central incisors and canine have been prepared
with multiple lingual ledges and multiple proximal grooves.

Pontics are usually of an all-metal or metal-ceramic design, depending on the aesthetic requirements. The
metal-ceramic pontic is a highly versatile replacement,
combining the aesthetic benefits of porcelain with the
strength of metal, and is widely adaptable to edentulous
spaces of various sizes.
Pontic design must include meticulous attention to
the amount of ridge coverage; the area of contact must be
minimized, and the embrasures must be as large as possible while meeting aesthetic demands. These procedures
are mandatory to provide soft-tissue access for oral hygiene aids.

REMOVABLE PARTIAL DENTURES
When the number of missing teeth prevents use of a fixed
partial denture, a removable partial denture becomes a
restoration of necessity. Indications for a removable partial denture include excessive span length, the inability to
achieve adequate retention for a fixed prosthesis, congenital malformations that result in only a few widely spaced

504

Chapter 24

n

Prosthodontic Treatment of the Adolescent Patient

A

B

C

D

Figure 24-11 A, Congenitally missing maxillary lateral incisor. B, Mirror view of the canine and first premolar, which have
been prepared for a resin-bonded prosthesis. The lingual cusp of the premolar has been reduced so the retainer can be
bonded over the cusp. C, Mirror view of bonded prosthesis showing coverage of the premolar lingual cusp. D, Facial view of
completed prosthesis.

A

B
Figure 24-12 Scanning electron micrograph of etched base

metal (×1000). (Courtesy of B. K. Moore.)

Figure 24-13 A, Teeth isolated with rubber dam in preparation
for resin-bonding procedures. B, Prosthesis bonded with resin.

Chapter 24

n

Prosthodontic Treatment of the Adolescent Patient

505

A

B

C

D

Figure 24-14 A, The four maxillary incisors have been lost as a result of traumatic injury. Note the long span, short clinical
crowns, and facial flare to the canines, which make retention and resistance form difficult to achieve for a conventional fixed
partial denture. B, Lateral view showing the relationship of the mandibular incisors to the residual alveolar ridge. The trauma
caused substantial bone loss, and the ridge is located lingual to the mandibular incisors (arrow indicates the position of the incisive papilla on the crest of the residual alveolar ridge), which necessitates the use of a removable partial denture base for lip
support and proper aesthetics. C, Occlusal view of maxillary removable partial denture. D, Facial view of completed prosthesis.

permanent teeth, and injuries that have caused multiple
teeth and often alveolar bone to be lost (Fig. 24-14).
When treatment is planned for an adolescent patient
who needs a removable partial denture, there are three
major objectives: (1) the restoration of the functions of
mastication and speech, (2) the restoration of dental and
facial aesthetics, and (3) the preservation of the remaining teeth and their supportive tissues.
The function of mastication can be restored when
correct, harmonious, and nondestructive occlusal relationships are provided between the supplied teeth and
the opposing remaining natural dentition. The development of proper speech can be ensured if the parts of the
partial denture are given correct form, dimension, and
position in their relationships to the tongue, cheek, and
lips.
The restoration of aesthetics is often the most important personal consideration for adolescent patients. Artificial teeth of compatible color, size, and form, naturally
arranged and positioned, enhance dental aesthetics. In
addition, the form and size of the base of a partial denture must be correct to ensure the restoration of normal
facial contours.
The preservation of the remaining teeth and their supportive tissues is the most important objective of all but
will not be achieved without adequate mouth preparation, correct partial denture design, accurate fabrication

of that design, periodic professional follow-up care, and
continued proper home care by the patient.
Additional dental procedures may be required to create
an oral environment that will furnish proper support and
retention for the removable partial denture and that will
prevent the development of forces or processes that are
harmful to the remaining teeth and their supportive tissues. These preparatory procedures may involve all phases
or branches of dentistry. Adolescents may require periodontal procedures, particularly to increase crown length
for crown or fixed partial denture retention or to improve
tissue contours so that more ideal results can be achieved.
Orthodontic procedures can be used to reposition severely malpositioned teeth that would otherwise require
extraction and particularly for malpositioned teeth that
are vital to an adequate treatment plan.

OVERDENTURES
Occasionally, congenital abnormalities or trauma results
in the loss of multiple teeth, and the resulting interarch
relationship does not allow a conventional removable
partial denture to reestablish proper occlusion with opposing teeth. This situation may necessitate fabrication
of a prosthesis that overlays all or part of the remaining
teeth so that proper function and facial aesthetics can be
established (Fig. 24-15, A and B).18

506

Chapter 24

n

Prosthodontic Treatment of the Adolescent Patient

A

B
Figure 24-15 A, Facial view of maxillary and mandibular
teeth showing significant malformation and spacing in a patient with ectodermal dysplasia. B, Facial view of maxillary
and mandibular overdentures showing improved aesthetics.
(Photos courtesy of Dr. Adriana Diaz Backer.)

IMPLANT PROSTHESES
An understanding of dental development and craniofacial growth is certainly a prerequisite for anyone anticipating the use of dental implants in growing patients.
Growth and development in the maxilla and mandible
are quite different, as are growth and development
in the specific areas of each arch.19-21 In the maxilla,
growth is intimately associated with the growth of the
cranial base in early childhood, whereas later growth
occurs primarily by enlargement of the maxilla. This
growth is extremely variable and can be observed as
vertical growth, transverse growth, and anteroposterior
growth. Transverse growth occurs primarily at the midpalatal suture of the maxilla. The sutural growth site
is extremely important and poses a risk to the placement of an implant-supported prosthesis that crosses
this suture and could limit its growth potential. The
maxilla also grows vertically by passive displacement as
well as by alveolar appositional growth. It is the vertical
component of maxillary growth that causes the most

concern in the long-term positional stability of the individual implant and its effect on restorative function
and aesthetics.
Mandibular growth differs greatly from the complex
growth in the maxilla. Not closely associated with major
cranial passive growth, mandibular growth is primarily
downward and forward, mediated by appositional condylar growth. This growth is not purely linear but can
be rotational secondary to the precise direction of condylar growth patterns. The appositional growth is also
refined by certain areas of resorption, primarily seen on
the anterior aspect of the ramus. As the mandible increases in length, it also increases in width, secondary
to the flaring of posterior growth direction. This allows
the mandible to accommodate to the increased maxillary width caused by the growth in the palatal suture
area. Anterior stabilization is accomplished by the early
closure of the mandibular symphysis. Although less
dynamic than maxillary growth, mandibular growth
can create many complexities that could place dental
implants at positional risk, especially in the posterior
mandible, secondary to vertical changes and resorptive
processes.
In addition to understanding growth and development, the clinician must also comprehend the dynamics
of the positional relationship between the dental implant
and its biological environment in the growing patient. A
wealth of dental literature from in vivo evidence-based
studies attests to the long-term success of dental implants
and their associated prostheses in adults. Such a wealth
of knowledge does not exist, however, for the growing
patient. The behavior of an osseointegrated dental implant essentially resembles that of an ankylosed tooth,
and the latter therefore provides an accurate model of
the behavior of an implant in a growing patient. Two
facets of the relationship of ankylotic teeth to their actively growing environment must be understood. First,
the ankylotic tooth, lacking the adaptive mechanisms of
a healthy tooth, does not erupt normally and becomes
buried. Second, failing to participate in vertical growth,
it often creates severe malocclusions secondary to tipping
and associated growth changes in normal teeth adjacent
to the affected ankylotic tooth. It seems logical that an
osseointegrated implant placed prematurely could elicit
the same negative growth effects.
The routine successful use of osseointegrated dental implants in total or partial support of prostheses in
adults has heightened interest in their use in younger
patients. Adolescents are frequently seen who have
congenital anomalies, have undergone ablative surgical
procedures or radiation therapy, or have experienced
traumatic tooth loss, and the use of dental implants
would greatly assist prosthesis support (Figs. 24-16 and
24-17). Replacement of congenitally missing teeth with
implants can often be accomplished in an aesthetic
manner that preserves the integrity of adjacent teeth.
However, dental and skeletal growth is a major confounding variable related to the use of dental implants
in adolescent patients.22
There are two primary concerns related to the placement of implants before growth is completed: (1) the

Chapter 24

n

Prosthodontic Treatment of the Adolescent Patient

507

regarding premature placement of implants. Refer to
Chapter 19 for a more in-depth discussion of this topic.

IMPLANT USAGE BEFORE GROWTH
COMPLETION

A

B

Although it is best to wait until maxillary and mandibular growth is completed before placing osseointegrated
implants, dentists are constantly faced with apparent
indications for implant treatment. The clinician must
understand the disadvantages of early placement and
weigh those factors against the functional and aesthetic
advantages afforded by implants. If a determination is
made that implants are needed before growth completion, it is more predictable to restore larger edentulous
areas with implants than to place a single implantsupported crown in a growing patient (Figs. 24-18 and
24-19). The successful use of implant-assisted prostheses
in patients with multiple missing teeth has been reported.23-26 Implants have been placed in the anterior mandible in patients as young as 5 years of age (Fig. 24-20).
Often, the placement of implants in this area diminishes
the residual alveolar resorption anticipated from many
years of removable prosthesis wear. Unfortunately, one
of the most frequently encountered implant indications
is treatment of the traumatic loss or congenital absence
of a single anterior maxillary tooth. The placement of
dental implants in this area should not be attempted until the accelerated phase of peripubertal growth is close
to complete.

IMPLANTS FOR ORTHODONTIC ANCHORAGE

C
Figure 24-16 A, A congenital condition resulted in extensive and aggressive bone changes and loss of the teeth.
Four implants were placed in this patient at the age of 12
years. This treatment greatly enhances prosthesis stability
and will help preserve the remaining mandibular anterior
bone. Because the mandibular symphysis fuses at birth or
shortly thereafter, early implant placement in this area is
less affected by future growth. B, Mandibular overdenture
prosthesis that will be supported by the four implants and
bar. C, Facial view of the completed prosthesis.

effect of growth on the long-term relative position of the
dental implant, and (2) the effect of the implant-supported
prosthesis on future dental and skeletal growth.
An understanding of dental and skeletal growth and
development and its variability in the male and female
adolescent population elucidates the serious concerns

Osseointegrated implants have been used as valuable adjuncts to orthodontic treatment when there is a need for
anchorage but no conventional tooth anchorage is available.27-31 Because the implants act as ankylosed teeth and
are incapable of being moved by orthodontic or orthopedic forces, they serve as ideal anchorage units. Their
use has produced tooth movements that otherwise would
not be possible, particularly when a great many teeth are
missing as a result of trauma or congenital anomalies. Implants are especially valuable when their postorthodontic
positioning permits them to be used to support a future
prosthesis.

RECARE PROGRAM
The prosthodontic treatment of an adolescent does not
end with the placement of the prosthesis. Periodic ­recare
appointments for inspection, maintenance, repair, or
replacement are a necessity. For patients who have removable partial dentures, relining or rebasing should be
performed when indicated. When all-ceramic crowns or
metal-ceramic restorations are used in an adolescent patient, replacement may be needed periodically as the gingival tissue assumes its adult position. Patients with fixed
partial dentures should be examined periodically for softtissue health, evidence of occlusal wear, and responses of
the supportive tissues to the added stress loads. Patients
with implant-assisted restorations should be evaluated
frequently to ensure the health of the osseointegrated implant and its surrounding tissue, as well as to assess the

508

Chapter 24

n

Prosthodontic Treatment of the Adolescent Patient

B
A

C

D

Figure 24-17 A, A 16-year-old boy traumatically fractured the maxillary left lateral incisor, rendering it nonrestorable. An
implant is being placed in the socket immediately after extraction. B, Edentulous ridge following implant placement. C, Incisal
view of the implant after appropriate bone and soft-tissue healing has occurred. D, Completed metal-ceramic restoration.

effect of the implant-supported prosthesis on the overall
growth and development of the patient. The use of dental
implants to assist in the support of a prosthesis necessitates an extremely vigilant recare program.
Every adolescent patient must be taught proper oral
hygiene and home care for his or her prosthodontic
restorations and must be motivated until adequate performance is routinely achieved. Each patient with fixed
or implant-supported prostheses should be taught the
use of aids such as the floss threader and interproximal
brush to enhance oral hygiene efforts. Only with regular
recare programs can maximum longevity of service be
realized.

PROTECTIVE MOUTHGUARDS
Although this chapter is concerned with the prosthodontic treatment of adolescents, emphasis should always be
placed on the prevention of oral disease and injury. The
number and severity of injuries to the teeth and jaws can
be significantly reduced through the faithful use of protective mouthguards by athletes who are engaged in contact sports.32,33
A recent evidence-based review of the prevention of
dental injuries noted, however, that there are only a few
epidemiological studies on protectiveness of mouthguards, and that most of them have a low level of evidence.34
Effective and relatively inexpensive prefabricated
mouthguards are available at sporting goods stores.

A custom-made mouthguard can be fabricated, however,
by vacuum-molding a sheet of thick, clear material over
a stone cast of the maxillary arch. Seals and Dorrough
have reviewed the advantages of custom-made mouth
protectors.35
Studies comparing custom-made (laboratory) mouthguards with standard (manufactured) or intraorally formed
mouthguards have shown that the custom-made mouthguards provide better fit and comfort, are less likely to
affect the player’s speech adversely, and are less likely to
become loose.36 Several materials have been suggested for
use in mouthguards, including poly(vinyl acetate-ethylene) copolymer thermoplastic, polyurethane, and laminated thermoplastic.37 Chaconas and colleagues demonstrated that the laminated thermoplastic underwent significantly less dimensional change compared with other
materials.38 McGlumphy et al. have recently evaluated the
use of three-dimensional imaging to assess the strain and
deformation of mouthguard materials.39
Because a custom-made mouthguard accurately fits
individual tooth and arch form, it affords maximal resistance to dislodgement. The technique of fabrication involves placing the mouthguard material (Fig. 24-21, A) in
a molding machine, which softens the material by heat
(see Fig. 24-21, B) and closely adapts it to a dry stone cast
by vacuum (see Fig. 24-21, C). After the adapted material
has cooled, the guard is removed from the cast and the
excess peripheral material is trimmed off with scissors (see
Fig. 24-21, D). The borders are rounded when the material
is trimmed with a resin-trimming bur and flamed with a

Chapter 24

A

B

C

D

n

Prosthodontic Treatment of the Adolescent Patient

509

F

E
Figure 24-18 A, Panoramic radiograph of a 12-year-old with partial anodontia of unknown origin. B, Occlusal view of maxillary arch showing primary teeth that will be extracted. C, Four maxillary implants have been placed. D, Six mandibular
implants have been placed to provide prosthesis stability and preserve bone. E, Maxillary and mandibular overdentures with
magnets to augment stability and retention. F, Facial view of completed overdentures.

510

Chapter 24

n

Prosthodontic Treatment of the Adolescent Patient

B

A

C

D

Figure 24-19 A, Panoramic radiograph of a 13-year-old patient after removal of a giant cell granuloma from the anterior mandible. B, Radiograph showing ridge defect and the location of the three implants. C, Fixed prosthesis that will be attached to
the three implants. D, Prosthesis in place.

A

B

C
Figure 24-20 A, Two implants placed in a 5-year-old patient with partial anodontia resulting from ectodermal dysplasia.
Impression copings have been attached for the impression procedure. Because of the early fusion of the mandibular symphysis, future bone growth will be minimally affected. B, Incisal view of the retrievable prosthesis showing two lingually located
screws. A retrievable design permits the prosthetic teeth to be replaced to accommodate future growth. C, Facial view of
completed prosthesis.

Chapter 24

A

B

C

D

E

F

n

Prosthodontic Treatment of the Adolescent Patient

511

Figure 24-21 A, Clear material (0.150 inch) used to fabricate a mouthguard. B, Material clamped in machine and heated until
it softens and droops. C, Material vacuum-adapted to dry stone cast. D, Guard being trimmed with scissors. E, Appearance of
borders after being trimmed with acrylic bur and polished with pumice. F, Completed mouthguard on cast.

torch or polished with wet pumice on a rag wheel (see
Fig. 24-21, E).
Maximum retention is obtained when the entire hard
palate is covered. If the guard interferes with speech, however, a portion of the palatal area of the guard can be removed.
The successful use of mouthguards by many young
athletes has proven that they can be worn with comfort
and serve as effective safeguards against injuries to the
teeth.40,41

REFERENCES
1.	Caplan DJ, Weintraub JA: The oral health burden in the
United States: a summary of recent epidemiologic studies,
J Dent Educ 57(12):853–862, 1993.
2.	Vargas CM, et al.: Sociodemographic distribution of pediatric dental caries: NHANES III, 1988-1994, J Am Dent Assoc
129:1229–1238, 1998.

3.	Barmes DE, Leous PA: Assessment of periodontal status by
CPITN and its applicability to the development of long-term
goals on periodontal health of the population, Int Dent J
36:177–181, 1986.
4.	Gift HC, Bhat M: Dental visits for orofacial injury: defining
the dentist’s role, J Am Dent Assoc 124:92–98, 1993.
5.	Bader JD, et al.: Preliminary estimates of the incidence
and consequences of tooth fracture, J Am Dent Assoc 126:
1650–1654, 1995.
6.	
Oliveira BH, et al.: Biannual fluoride varnish application
and caries incidence in preschoolers: a 24-month follow-up
randomized placebo-controlled clinical trial, Caries Res 48:
228–236, 2014.
7.	Hussey DL, et al.: Performance of 400 adhesive bridges fitted in a restorative dentistry department, J Dent 19:221–225,
1991.
8.	Leempoel PJ, et al.: The survival rate of bridges: a study of
1674 bridges in 40 Dutch general practices, J Oral Rehabil
22:327–330, 1995.

512

Chapter 24

n

Prosthodontic Treatment of the Adolescent Patient

9.	Barrack G, Bretz WA: A long-term prospective study of the
etched-cast restoration, Int J Prosthodont 6:428–434, 1993.
10.	Hansson O, Bergström B: A longitudinal study of resin-bonded
prostheses, J Prosthet Dent 76:132–139, 1996.
11.	Creugers NHJ, et al.: Clinical performance of resin-bonded
bridges: a 5 year prospective study. Part II: influence of patient dependent variables, J Oral Rehabil 16:521–527, 1989.
12.	Atta MO, Smith BGN: The bond strength of a new adhesive
bridge cement to sand-blasted nickel-chromium alloy compared with composite to acid-etched alloy, J Dent Res 65(Spec
Iss):496(abst no 74), 1986.
13.	Spinas E, Aresu M, Canargiu F: Prosthetic rehabilitation interventions in adolescents with fixed bridges: a 5-year observational study, Eur J Paediatr Dent 14(1):59–62, 2013.
14.	Schwartz NL, et al.: Unserviceable crowns and fixed partial
dentures: life-span and causes for loss of serviceability, J Am
Dent Assoc 81:1395–1401, 1970.
15.	Foster LV: Failed conventional bridge work from general
dental practice: clinical aspects and treatment needs of 142
cases, Br Dent J 168:199–201, 1990.
16.	Leith R, O’Connell AC: A clinical study evaluating success of
2 commercially available preveneered primary molar stainless steel crowns, Pediatr Dent 33:300–306, 2001.
17.	Beattie S, et al.: Fracture resistance of 3 types of primary esthetic stainless steel crowns, J Can Dent Assoc 77:b90, 2011.
18.	Vergo TJ: Prosthodontics for pediatric patients with congenital/developmental orofacial anomalies: a long-term followup, J Prosthet Dent 86:342–347, 2001.
19.	Cronin RJ, Oesterle LJ: Implant use in growing patients:
treatment planning concerns, Dent Clin North Am 42(1):
1–34, 1998.
20.	Cronin RJ, et al.: Mandibular implants and the growing patient, Int J Oral Maxillofac Implants 9:55–62, 1994.
21.	Oesterle LJ, et al.: Maxillary implants and the growing patient, Int J Oral Maxillofac Implants 8:377–387, 1993.
22.	Bergendal B, et al.: Implant failure in young children with
ectodermal dysplasia: a retrospective evaluation of use and
outcome of dental implant treatment in children in Sweden,
Int J Oral Maxillofac Implants 23(3):520–524, 2008.
23.	Guckes AD, et al.: Using endosseous dental implants for patients with ectodermal dysplasia, J Am Dent Assoc 122:59–62,
1991.
24.	Ledermann PD, et al.: Osseointegrated dental implants as
alternative therapy to bridge construction or orthodontics
in young patients: seven years of clinical experience, Pediatr
Dent 15:327–333, 1993.
25.	Westwood RM, Duncan JM: Implants in adolescents: a literature review and case reports, Int J Oral Maxillofac Implants
11:750–755, 1996.

26.	Aydinbelge M, et al.: Implants in children with hypohidrotic
ectodermal dysplasia: an alternative approach to esthetic
management: case report and review of the literature, Pediatr
Dent 35(5):441–446, 2013.
27.	Kokich VG: Managing complex orthodontic problems: the
use of implants for anchorage, Semin Orthod 2:153–160,
1996.
28.	Upadhyay M, et al.: Mini-implant anchorage for en-masse retraction of maxillary anterior teeth: a clinical cephalometric
study, Am J Orthod Dentofacial Orthop 134(6):803–810, 2008.
29.	Iseri H, et al.: Ten-year follow-up of a patient with hemifacial
microsomia treated with distraction osteogenesis and orthodontics: an implant analysis, Am J Orthod Dentofacial Orthop
134(2):296–304, 2008.
30.	Upadhyay M, et al.: Mini-implants for en masse intrusion of
maxillary anterior teeth in a severe Class II division 2 malocclusion, J Orthod 35(2):79–89, 2008.
31.	Garfinkle JS, et al.: Evaluation of orthodontic mini-implant
anchorage in premolar extraction therapy in adolescents,
Am J Orthod Dentofacial Orthop 133(5):642–653, 2008.
32.	Matalon V, et al.: Compliance of children and youngsters
in the use of mouthguards, Dent Traumatol 24(4):462–467,
2008.
33.	Knapik JJ, et al.: Mouthguards in sport activities: history,
physical properties and injury prevention effectiveness,
Sports Med 37:117–144, 2007.
34.	Sigurdsson A: Evidence-based review of prevention of dental
injuries, Pediatr Dent 35:184–190, 2013.
35.	Seals RR, Dorrough BC: Custom mouth protectors: a review
of their applications, J Prosthet Dent 51:238–242, 1984.
36.	Stokes ANS, et al.: Comparison of laboratory and intraorally
formed mouth protectors, Endod Dent Traumatol 3:255–258,
1987.
37.	Geary JL, Kinirons MJ: Post thermoforming dimensional
changes of ethylene vinyl acetate used in custom-made
mouthguards for trauma prevention—a pilot study, Dent
Traumatol 24(3):350–355, 2008.
38.	Chaconas SJ, et al.: A comparison of athletic mouthguard
materials, Am J Sports Med 13:193–197, 1985.
39.	McGlumphy KC, et al.: Pilot study of 3D image correlation
photogrammetry to assess strain and deformation of mouthguard materials, Dent Traumatol 30(3):236–239, 2014 Jun.
40.	Gawlak D, et al.: Comparison of usability properties of custom-made and standard self-adapted mouthguards, Dent
Traumatol 30(4):306–311, 2014 Aug.
41.	Tuna EB, Ozel E: Factors affecting sports-related orofacial
injuries and the importance of mouthguards, Sports Med
44(6):777–783, 2014 Jun.

PART

5

CHAPTER

25

MANAGEMENT OF SPECIAL MEDICAL ISSUES
AND PRACTICE MANAGEMENT

Dental Problems of Children
with Special Health Care Needs
s James A. Weddell, Brian J. Sanders, and James E. Jones

For additional resources, please visit the

website.

CHAPTER OUTLINE
DENTAL ACCESS
FIRST DENTAL VISIT
RADIOGRAPHIC EXAMINATION
PREVENTIVE DENTISTRY
Home Dental Care
Diet and Nutrition
Fluoride Exposure
Preventive Restorations
Regular Professional Supervision
MANAGEMENT OF A CHILD WITH
SPECIAL HEALTH CARE NEEDS
DURING DENTAL TREATMENT
Protective Stabilization

A

INTELLECTUAL DISABILITY
Dental Treatment of a Person with
Intellectual Disability
DOWN SYNDROME (TRISOMY 21
SYNDROME)
LEARNING DISABILITIES
FRAGILE X SYNDROME
FETAL ALCOHOL SPECTRUM
DISORDER
AUTISM SPECTRUM DISORDER
CEREBRAL PALSY
SPINA BIFIDA AND LATEX ALLERGY
RESPIRATORY DISEASES

pproximately 54 million children and adults in
the United States have a disabling condition.1
The American Academy of Pediatric Dentistry
defines individuals with special health care needs (SHCN)
as those with “any physical, developmental, mental, sensory, behavioral, cognitive, or emotional impairment or
limiting condition that requires medical management,
health care ­intervention, and/or use of specialized services or programs.”2 Individuals with SHCN are at increased
risk for oral disease.3
Many children with SHCN are best managed initially
by a multidisciplinary team in which a dentist is available
to evaluate the child’s extraoral and intraoral findings. A
diagnosis is then established, and an impression is gained
of the child’s strengths and weaknesses and the team’s
recommendations for future care. The child may then be
“mainstreamed” to a dental practitioner, whom the family chooses, if a preference is indicated. The team is available to help the family practitioner or pediatric dentist
treat the child and prepare the family for the child’s future treatment needs, because oral health is a vital part of
the child’s well-being and general health.3

Asthma (Reactive Airway Disease)
Bronchopulmonary Dysplasia
Cystic Fibrosis
HEARING LOSS
VISUAL IMPAIRMENT
HEART DISEASE
Congenital Heart Disease
Acquired Heart Disease
Dental Management
Cardiac Surgery Patients

Children with SHCN may present challenges that require special preparation before the dentist and office
staff can provide acceptable care. In addition, parental anxiety concerning the problems associated with a
child’s SHCN frequently delays dental care until significant oral disease has developed. Also, some dentists feel
uncomfortable providing treatment for children with
SHCN, which results in a loss of greatly needed services.
Kane and colleagues reported failure to obtain routine
medical care as well as income below 400% of federal
poverty guidelines as barriers to the receipt of dental
care for children with SHCN.4 Financing and reimbursement issues are other barriers for families of children
with SHCN and for dental practitioners. Nonfinancial
barriers such as language and psychosocial, structural,
and cultural considerations also interfere with access to
oral care.5
This chapter discusses disabling pediatric conditions
that dentists sometimes encounter in practice. If a dentist
becomes familiar with the SHCN of a child and with the
parents’ concerns, the dental management of the child
can be gratifying.
513

514

Chapter 25

n

Dental Problems of Children with Special Health Care Needs

DENTAL ACCESS
Improving access to oral health care for those deprived of
needed services should be of great concern to the dental
profession. Large segments of the population do not have
access to dental care. Children with SHCN, such as those
who are chronically ill, homebound, and have developmental disabilities and emotional impairments, fall into
this group. Although a majority of children with SHCN
receive needed medical and dental services, 24% report
at least one unmet need. Preventive dental care is the
most common of those unmet needs.6 In addition, these
groups have been identified as a significant portion of the
20% of the U.S. population who exhibit 80% of all caries.
The rapid expansion of the elderly population, the
presence of children with SHCN, and the emergence of
legislative guidelines for people of all ages with SHCN are
three important factors that should prompt dentists to

address cost-efficient ways to make their office facilities
and operatory areas accessible for persons with SHCN. In
August 1984 another federal-level cornerstone was laid
for barrier-free facility access with the passage of the Uniform Federal Accessibility Standards.7 Enacted in 1990,
the Americans with Disabilities Act defines the dental
office as a place of public accommodation.8 Dental consumer populations are becoming more sensitive to the
service needs and desires of people with SHCN by improving family conditions and public education. Failure
to accommodate patients with SHCN could be considered
discrimination and a violation of state or federal law.
Table 25-1 lists common minimum requirements needed
to gain access.
In the dental operatory, doorways should be 4 inches
(10 cm) wider than normal. In the dental suite, where
floor circulation space is at a premium, aisle passage in the
operatory area should be planned with the dimensions

Table 25-1
Accessibility Guidelines
External/Internal
Building Features

Gradient

Length

Width

Surface, Other Specifics

Parking space

1:50 max slope

Standard

Walkway

1:12 max slope

Not applicable

Auto: 96 inches
Van: 144 inches
36 inches

Passenger loading
zone
Curb ramps
Door

Flat

20 feet

60 inches

Nonskid, paved, sign-posted,
adjacent to walkway
Nonskid, no obstructions,
overhangs, smooth
Same as above

1:12 max slope
5-foot entrance and
exit platform area

Standard

36 inches
32-inch minimum;
preferably 36 inches

Interior ramp

1:20 max slope

Wheelchair lift

Bilevel

72-inch minimum 36 inches
length if rise >6
inches
8-foot max drop
36 × 48 inches

Corridor
Flooring

Flat, firm carpet

Standard
Not applicable

Signs
Waiting room

Braille, raised letters
Flat

Above 5 feet
Standard

Restrooms

Flat

Public telephone

No higher than 4 feet

Elevator

Flat

Operatory

Flat 8 × 10 feet

3 feet above floor

48 inches/64 inches
½-inch maximum
thickness
Readable
36-inch aisle; one
cleared area:
36 × 52 inches
32-inch stall min.,
preferably 36 inches
26-inch clearance
54 × 68 inches

Standard

32- to 36-inch door

Nonskid, side flair <1:10 slope
Away from prevailing winds,
lever with 10-lb pull, autoassisted door available, kick
plate
Nonskid, handrails

Nonskid, dependent on specific chair
New facility, no obstacles
No doormats, level thresholds
Near latch of office door
No carpet pad, well-insulated,
minimum low-frequency
background noise
Nonskid, magnetic catch door
Phone directory near phone,
adjustable volume control
Nonskid, call and control
box 48 inches high, include
Braille or incised letters
Nonskid, rotating or movable
chair, drill, and suction

Adapted from Bill DJ, Weddell JA: Dental office access for patients with disabling conditions, Spec Care Dentist 6:246-252, 1986.

Chapter 25

shown in Figure 25-1. The required wheelchair turning
space and top space under furniture and fixtures may be
more readily accommodated if one operatory is specifically designed with a movable dental chair, instrument control unit, and suction system. Movable equipment should
enhance the opportunity for the patient’s wheelchair to
be backed into the operatory, thus reducing the need for
more wheelchair-turning space. If possible, a wider radius for turning space is desirable to accommodate the
wheelchair extensions and adaptations that are required
for some persons. Dental chairs should be adjustable for
height to match different wheelchair designs.

FIRST DENTAL VISIT
Many people avoid dental treatment for themselves or
their children because of their fear that dental visits are
routinely painful. Dental professionals should use every
opportunity to help patients or parents overcome this
barrier to the mainstream of effective dental care and establish a “dental home” with them (see Chapter 1).
Upon scheduling an appointment, the dental receptionist should determine the presence and nature of any SHCN,
identify the family’s medical provider, and alert the dentist
so that adequate time can be allowed. The initial dental
­examination for a child with SHCN is like the initial examination described in Chapter 1. Special attention should be
given to obtaining a thorough medical and dental history.
The names and addresses of medical or dental personnel
who have previously treated the patient are necessary for
consultation purposes. Consultation with these specialists
is common; this helps provide insight in case management
and planning and avoids unwanted outcomes. Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act compliance is
mandatory throughout this process.
The first dental appointment is very important and can
set the stage for subsequent appointments. As previously

Dental Problems of Children with Special Health Care Needs

515

noted, parental anxiety about a child’s dental treatment
may be a significant factor. In many situations, parents or
guardians do not realize the importance of this visit and
desire treatment immediately. By scheduling the patient
at a designated time (early in the day) and allowing sufficient time to talk with the parents (or the guardian) and
the patient before initiating any dental care, a practitioner
can establish an excellent relationship with them. Sending
a letter before the appointment explaining the first visit
to the family and sending another letter afterward letting
them know how helpful they were are beneficial. This initial demonstration of sincere interest in the child often
proves advantageous and saves time throughout the entire
treatment process. Obtaining an informed consent is imperative. Many times, dental treatment must be delayed
until an informed consent is obtained through a guardian
or court petition when no parents are legally accountable.

RADIOGRAPHIC EXAMINATION
Adequate radiographic records are often necessary in
planning dental treatment for the child with SHCN.
Through appropriate behavior management of the child,
a dentist can usually perform a complete radiographic
examination of the teeth when indicated. Occasionally,
assistance from the parent and dental auxiliaries and the
use of immobilization devices may be necessary to obtain
the films. Better cooperation may be elicited from some
children by delaying radiographs until the second visit,
when they are familiar with the dental office and have
found it a friendly place.
For patients with limited ability to control film position, intraoral films with bitewing tabs are used for all
bitewing and periapical radiographs. An 18-inch (46cm) length of floss is attached through a hole made in
the tab (Fig. 25-2) to facilitate retrieval of the film if it
falls toward the pharynx. Hardwired digital sensors have
reduced this risk, although they may be difficult to tolerate by the patient. Regardless of the types of radiographs
to be made, the patient should wear a lead apron with a
thyroid shield, and anyone who helps hold the patient
and the film or sensor steady should wear a lead-lined
apron and gloves (Fig. 25-3).

R
32"

36"

.5

31

36"

36"

Side access

Straight access

Cart

8 FT

10 FT

n

Figure 25-1 An accessible dental operatory floor plan

designed for either a straight or side access doorway. (From
Bill DJ, Weddell JA: Dental office access for patients with
disabling conditions, Spec Care Dentist 6:246-252, 1986.)

Figure 25-2 Bitewing radiographic film secured with floss.

516

Chapter 25

n

Dental Problems of Children with Special Health Care Needs

Figure 25-3 Extra assistance in holding the patient’s head steady to prevent movement while a radiograph is being made.

PREVENTIVE DENTISTRY
Preventing oral disease before it starts is the most desirable
way of ensuring good dental health for any dental patient.
An effective preventive dentistry program is ­important for
a child with SHCN because of the predisposing factors that
make restorative dental care harder to obtain when it is
necessary, and those who make preventive dental visits will
have fewer unmet needs.9 Dental diagnosis and treatment
planning will necessitate an accurate, up-to-date medical
history at each visit. After the diagnosis, the dentist should
determine the patient’s needs, assume the responsibility
for formulating an individual program for the child, and
adequately communicate to the parents and patient how
such a program can be affected. Use of a Caries-Risk Assessment Tool (CAT) to integrate these dental risk factors may
result in a more aggressive approach to the individual’s
dental treatment plan. A clear perception of the situation
by everyone involved is essential for a successful preventive program; adequate communication is vital.

HOME DENTAL CARE
Dental education of parents/guardians/caregivers is important to ensure that children with SHCN do not jeopardize their overall health by neglecting their oral health.
The parents (or the guardian) are initially responsible for
establishing good oral hygiene in the home. Reinforcement of good home dental care is provided through mass
media (e.g., newspapers, radio, television, and Internet),
communication with other people, and school activities
(e.g., health classes, parent-teacher association meetings,
and observation of National Dental Health Month). This
supplementary support relieves the dentist of having sole
responsibility for explaining the need for home dental
care and reinforces the receptivity of the parent and child
to such a program. The dentist or the hygienist is responsible for consulting with the caregiver of the child with
SHCN (i.e., parent, guardian, or nursing home attendant)
when continued oral hygiene problems occur. Regular

follow-up supervision at home and in the dental office is
essential for effective implementation of the preventive
dental treatment plan.
Home dental care should begin in infancy; the dentist should teach the parents to gently cleanse the incisors daily with a soft cloth or an infant toothbrush. For
older children who are unwilling or physically unable to
cooperate, the dentist should teach the parent or guardian to clean teeth twice a day using correct toothbrushing
techniques, safely immobilizing the child when necessary. Figure 25-4 shows several positions for toothbrushing
that permit firm control and support of the child, adequate visibility, and convenient positioning of the adult,
with reasonable comfort for both adult and child (also see
Chapter 7). Positions most commonly used for children
requiring
   oral care assistance are as follows:
•	The standing or sitting child is placed in front of the
adult so that the adult can cradle the child’s head with
one hand while using the other hand to brush the teeth.
•	The child reclines on a sofa or bed with the head angled backward on the parent’s lap. Again, the child’s
head is stabilized with one hand while the teeth are
brushed with the other hand.
•	The parents face each other with their knees touching. The child’s buttocks are placed on one parent’s
lap, with the child facing that parent while the child’s
head and shoulders lie on the other parent’s knees;
this allows the first parent to brush the teeth.
•	The extremely difficult patient is isolated in an open
area and reclined in the brusher’s lap. The patient is
then immobilized by an extra attendant while the
brusher institutes proper oral care. If a child cannot
be adequately immobilized by one person, then both
parents and perhaps siblings may be needed to complete the home dental care procedures.
•	The standing and resistive child is placed in front of
the caregiver so that the adult can wrap his or her legs
around the child to support the torso while using the
hands to support the head and brush the teeth.
  

Chapter 25

n

Dental Problems of Children with Special Health Care Needs

D
A

E

B

F

C
Figure 25-4 Common positions for plaque removal. A, Standing. B, Upright wheelchair. C, Reclining on couch.

D, Reclining in bed. E, “Leg-lock” position. F, Reclining on floor.

517

518

Chapter 25

n

Dental Problems of Children with Special Health Care Needs

If a child with SHCN is institutionalized, the staff should
be instructed in the proper dental care regimen for the child.
Wrapped tongue blades may be of benefit in helping to keep
a child’s mouth open while plaque is being removed. Stabilization of the child’s head prevents unnecessary trauma
from sudden movements. Follow-up observation is carried
out by the dentist or the hygienist, and it is appropriate to
offer in-service training sessions and to check with the staff
periodically to identify and solve the problems associated
with an oral hygiene program in the institution.
Some parents and health centers have encouraged children with SHCN to assume the responsibility for their own
oral hygiene, but the results are usually poor. Although
independent brushing is not contraindicated, parents and
staff should be aware that, without their follow-up, unsupervised oral hygiene procedures in children with SHCN
can have serious dental consequences. The amount of supervision and assistance provided by the parents or staff
should depend on the child’s willingness to cooperate
and ability to maintain good oral hygiene twice a day.
A plaque control program is essential in monitoring
oral hygiene in the child with SHCN and determining the
level of success achieved by each patient. The brushing
technique for patients with SHCN who have fine or gross
motor deficiencies limiting their ability to brush should
be effective and yet simple for the person performing the
brushing. One technique often recommended is the horizontal scrub method because it is easy to perform and can
yield good results. This technique consists of performing
gentle horizontal strokes on cheek, tongue, and biting
surfaces of all teeth and gums. Other patients with SHCN
without such motor problems can use the age-appropriate
techniques previously discussed in Chapter 7. A soft, multitufted nylon brush should be used.
Figure 25-5 illustrates some modifications that may
be made to a toothbrush to help persons with poor
fine motor skills improve their brushing techniques.
Although many types of grips are available, using the
­
patient’s hand to custom-design a handle has often had
good results (Fig. 25-6). Electric toothbrushes have also
been used effectively by children with SHCN. The vibration and noise tend to desensitize the patient for future

dental appointments if followed by positive reinforcement, while the design and color are motivational for the
child. Also, commercial toothbrush products are available
with suction abilities built into the brush (Sage Products,
Cary, Illinois, United States; http://www.sageproducts
.ca/products/oral-hygiene/nonSuction.cfm?section=NonSuction%20Products). The suction is advantageous because of the excess saliva often found in patients with
SHCN. Daily flossing, with supervision or the use of flossholders, is essential to maintain optimal gingival health.

DIET AND NUTRITION
Diet and nutrition influence dental caries by affecting the
type and virulence of the microorganisms in dental plaque,

A

B
Figure 25-5 Various toothbrush handle modifications.

Figure 25-6 A, Custom-designed acrylic handle. B, Patient

using the custom-handle toothbrush.

Chapter 25

n

Dental Problems of Children with Special Health Care Needs

519

the resistance of teeth and supporting structures, and the
properties of saliva in the oral cavity. A proper noncariogenic diet, as outlined in Chapter 8, is essential to a good
preventive program for a child with SHCN. As discussed in
Chapter 9 one should assess the diet by reviewing answers
on a diet survey with the parent, realizing that allow­ances
must be made for certain conditions for which dietary
modifications are required. For example, conditions associated with difficulty in swallowing, such as severe cerebral
palsy, may require that the patient be on a pureed diet. Patients with certain metabolic disturbances or syndromes,
such as phenylketonuria, diabetes, or Prader-Willi syndrome, have diets that restrict specific foods or total caloric
consumption. Whatever the special circumstances, any dietary recommendations should be made individually after
proper consultation with the patient’s primary physician
or dietitian, along with early intervention and aggressive
preventive care based on the child’s caries risk.10 The oral
side effects of the child’s medications should be reviewed
with the parents or guardians at each visit to identify specific concerns, for example, of increased caries or gingival
overgrowth, to prevent or minimize these problems. Particular emphasis should be placed on discontinuation of
the nursing bottle by 12 months of age and cessation of
at-will breast-feeding after teeth begin to erupt, to decrease
the likelihood of early childhood caries.

be restored with amalgam or long-wearing composites
to prevent further breakdown and decay. Patients with
severe bruxism and interproximal decay may need their
teeth restored with stainless steel crowns to increase the
longevity of the restorations.

FLUORIDE EXPOSURE

The principles of behavior management discussed in
Chapter 16 are even more important in the treatment
of a child with SHCN. Because hospital visits or previous
appointments with a physician frequently result in the
development of apprehension in the patient, additional
time must be spent with the parent and the child to establish rapport and dispel the child’s anxiety. If patient
cooperation cannot be obtained, the dentist must consider alternatives such as protective stabilization, conscious
sedation, or general anesthesia to allow the necessary
dental procedures to be performed.

The judicious use of systemic fluoride is important in
the comprehensive management of any dental patient.
Special emphasis should be placed on ensuring adequate
systemic fluoride for patients with disabilities. The dentist should first determine the concentration of fluoride in
the patient’s daily water supply. If the level of fluoride is
between 0.7 and 1 ppm, no supplementation is normally
required. If the dentist is not sure of the fluoride level
of the patient’s drinking water or fluoride acquired from
other sources, an analysis is indicated. Once the level has
been documented, a determination of the need for fluoride supplementation can be made. The amount of systemic fluoride supplementation necessary, along with the
various forms available (i.e., drops, tablets, and rinses), is
outlined in Chapter 9.
Whether the patient lives in an area with a fluoridated or nonfluoridated water supply, a topical fluoride
should be applied after a regularly scheduled professional
prophylaxis. Also, 5% neutral sodium fluoride varnishes
have been shown to be beneficial.11 An American Dental
Association–accepted dentifrice containing a therapeutic
fluoride compound should also be used daily. Some clinicians treating patients with SHCN who have chronically
poor oral hygiene and high decay rates suggest a daily
regimen of rinsing with 0.05% sodium fluoride solution.
Nightly application of a 0.4% stannous fluoride or 1.1%
sodium fluoride brush-on gel has also been successfully
used to decrease caries in children.

PREVENTIVE RESTORATIONS
Pit-and-fissure sealants have been shown to reduce occlusal caries effectively. Sealants are appropriate in patients
with SHCN. For a patient who requires dental work under
general anesthesia, deep occlusal pits and fissures should

REGULAR PROFESSIONAL SUPERVISION
Close observation of caries-susceptible patients and regular dental examinations are important in the treatment
of patients with SHCN. Although most patients are seen
semiannually for professional prophylaxis, examination,
and topical fluoride application, certain patients can benefit from recall examinations every 2, 3, or 4 months.
This is particularly true of patients who are confined to
institutions in which dental health programs are inadequate. Transferring the “dental home” of an adult patient
with SHCN to a knowledgeable general dentist is recommended when dental care needs go beyond the scope of
a pediatric dentist. If necessary, the pediatric dentist may
refer the patient for “specialized care” (e.g., oral surgeon,
orthodontist, periodontist).

MANAGEMENT OF A CHILD WITH
SPECIAL HEALTH CARE NEEDS DURING
DENTAL TREATMENT

PROTECTIVE STABILIZATION
Partial or complete protective stabilization of the patient
is sometimes a necessary and effective way to diagnose
and deliver dental care to patients who need help controlling their extremities, such as infants or patients with certain neuromuscular disorders. Protective stabilization is
also useful for managing combative, resistant patients so
that the patient, practitioner, and/or dental staff may be
protected from injury while care is being provided. This
can be performed by the dentist, staff, or parent, with or
without the aid of a stabilization device.
The parents, guardian, or patient (if an adult) must be
informed and must give consent, and the consent must
be documented before protective stabilization is used.
These individuals should have a clear understanding of
the type of stabilization to be used, the rationale, and the
duration of use. In many cases this information should be
included in the explanation of the overall management
approach for the child during the initial examination and
conference with the parents.
In October 1990 the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation
Act of 1987 became effective. It provided recommended
guidelines to reduce the risk of injury and death from the
use of patient restraints.

520

Chapter 25

n

Dental Problems of Children with Special Health Care Needs

The American Academy of Pediatric Dentistry’s Behavior Guidance for the Pediatric Dental Patient Reference Manual
2014-15 indicates that the need to diagnose and treat, as
well as to protect the safety of the patient, parent, staff,
and practitioner, must justify the use of stabilization.12
This decision should take into consideration a careful review of the patient’s emotional development, physical and
medical conditions (e.g., asthma-compromised respiratory function), dental needs, other alternative behavioral
modalities, and quality of dental care. Although the benefits and importance of protective stabilization have been
documented, the use of behavioral management or sedation, as discussed in Chapter 17 can reduce the amount of
stabilization required. This is only one means of behavior
control that can be used to achieve an adequate level of
dental treatment (Video 25-1: Use of stabilization).
The use of protective stabilization is indicated in the
following
situations:
  
•	A patient requires immediate diagnosis and/or limited
treatment and cannot cooperate because of lack of
maturity or mental or physical disability.
•	A patient requires diagnosis or treatment and does
not cooperate after other behavior management techniques have failed.
•	The safety of the patient, staff, parent, or practitioner
would be at risk without the use of protective
stabilization.
  

The use of stabilization is contraindicated in the following
   situations:
•	A cooperative nonsedated patient.
•	Patients who cannot be safely stabilized due to medical or physical conditions.
•	Patients who have experienced previous physical or
psychological trauma from protective stabilization
(unless no other alternatives are available).
•	Nonsedated patients with nonemergent treatment
requiring lengthy appointments.
  
Protective stabilization should not be used as punishment and should not be used solely for the convenience of
the staff. The patient’s record should display an informed
consent, the indications for use, the type of stabilization
used, and the duration of application. The tightness and
duration of stabilization must be monitored and reassessed
at regular intervals; stabilization around the extremities or
chest must not actively restrict circulation or respiration.
Stabilization should be terminated as soon as possible in
a patient who is experiencing severe stress or hysterics to
prevent possible physical or psychological trauma.
Common mechanical aids for maintaining the mouth
in an open position are shown in Figure 25-7. Padded
and wrapped tongue blades are easy to use, disposable,
and inexpensive. Frequently, parents of a child with disabilities are given wrapped tongue blades or Open Wide
(Specialized Care Co., Hampton, New Hampshire, United

A

B

C

D

Figure 25-7 Protective stabilization aids to keep the patient’s mouth open. A, Wrapped tongue blades. B, Open Wide (Specialized Care Co.,) disposable mouth prop in proper position. C, Molt Mouth Prop (Hu-Friedy) in proper position.
D, McKesson bite blocks.

Chapter 25

States) disposable mouth props to aid with home dental
care. The Open Wide mouth prop has a durable foam core
on the end of a tongue depressor. It is also easy to use, disposable, and available in two sizes, but it is slightly more
expensive than wrapped tongue blades. The Molt Mouth
Prop (Hu-Friedy, Chicago, Illinois, United States) can be
very helpful to manage a difficult patient for a prolonged
period. It is made in both adult and child sizes, allows
access to the opposite side of the mouth, and operates
by a “reverse scissors” action. Its disadvantages include
the possibility of lip and palatal lacerations and luxation
of teeth if not used correctly. Caution must be exercised
to prevent injury to the patient, and the prop should not
be allowed to rest on anterior teeth. The patient’s mouth
should not be forced beyond its natural limits because patient discomfort and panic will result, which will cause
further resistance and perhaps airway compromise.
Rubber bite blocks can be purchased in various sizes to
fit on the occlusal surfaces of the teeth and stabilize the

n

Dental Problems of Children with Special Health Care Needs

521

mouth in an open position. The bite blocks should have
floss attached for easy retrieval if they become dislodged
in the mouth.
Body control is gained through a variety of methods
and techniques. For children who have a severe intellectual disability or are very young, parents and dental assistants can help control movements during dental procedures (Fig. 25-8). Usually, however, for a child who has
a severe intellectual disability, better working conditions
and a more predictable patient response are obtained
through the combined use of psychological management
techniques, parental assistance, pharmacologic aids, and
stabilization.
The following are commonly used for protective stabilization:
  
Body
Papoose Board (Olympic Medical Corp., Seattle,
Washington, United States)
Triangular sheet

A

B
Figure 25-8 Assistance for protective stabilization. A, Parental aid during an examination. B, Additional assistance during the

dental procedure.

522

Chapter 25

n

Dental Problems of Children with Special Health Care Needs

Pedi-Wrap (The Medi-Kid Co., Hemet, California,
United States)
Beanbag dental chair insert
Safety belt
Extra assistant
Extremities
Posey straps (Posey Co., Arcadia, California, United
States)
Velcro straps
Towel and tape
Extra assistant
Head
Forearm-body support
Head positioner
Plastic bowl
Extra assistant
  
The Papoose Board (Fig. 25-9) has several advantages.
It is simple to store and use, reusable, and available in
sizes to hold both large and small children and has attached head stabilizers. It does not always fit the contours of a dental chair, however, and sometimes a supporting pillow is needed. Because it covers the patient’s
diaphragm, a pretracheal stethoscope is necessary to
monitor respiration if the board is used in combination
with sedation. An extremely resistant patient may develop hyperthermia if immobilized too long, and, of course,
any restrained patient requires constant attendance and
supervision.
The triangular sheet technique can be utilized to control an extremely resistant child (Fig. 25-10, A). This economical method allows the patient to sit upright during
radiographic examinations. Its disadvantages include the
frequent need for straps to maintain the patient’s position in the chair, the difficulty of its use with small patients, and the possibility of airway impingement if the
patient slips downward unnoticed. Hyperthermia may
be another problem during long periods of stabilization.
Again, the need for constant supervision is emphasized so
that these problems may be avoided.
The Rainbow Stabilizing System (Specialized Care Co.;
see Fig. 25-10, B), which is available with or without the
backboard, also comes in various sizes and allows the patient some movement while still being confined. Its mesh
fabric permits better ventilation, lessening the chances
of the patient developing hyperthermia. It, too, requires
straps to maintain body position in the dental chair and
constant supervision to prevent the patient from rolling
out of the chair.
The beanbag dental chair insert was developed to help
comfortably accommodate hypotonic and severely spastic persons who need more support and less stabilization
in a dental environment (see Fig. 25-10, C). It is reusable
and washable, and one size fits most people. Many patients with SHCN relax more in this setting.
The child’s arms and legs can be stabilized with help
from the parent or the dental assistant, with Posey straps,
or with a towel and adhesive tape (Fig. 25-11). If movement of the extremities is the only problem, having a
dental assistant stabilize the child is very helpful. Posey
straps fasten to the arms of the dental chair and allow
limited movement of the patient’s forearm and hand.

This limited movement frequently prevents overaction by
resistant or combative patients. Wrapping a towel around
the patient’s forearms and fastening it with adhesive tape
(without impeding circulation) is often helpful for an athetoid-spastic cerebral palsy patient who tries desperately
but without success to control body movements. Protective stabilization actually encourages relaxation and prevents undesired reflexes by keeping the patient’s arms in
the midline of the body.
A patient’s head position can usually be successfully
maintained through the use of forearm-body pressure by
the dentist. Other options include the presence of an additional assistant to stabilize the child’s head or use of a
Papoose Board head positioner or a plastic bowl (doggie
bowl) to provide position guidance (Fig. 25-12).
An explanation of the benefits of protective stabilization
should be presented by the dentist before use if communication with the patient is possible. The mouth prop can
be identified as a “tooth chair,” the Pedi-Wrap as a “safety
robe,” and a stabilization strap as a “safety belt,” which allows the patient to feel secure rather than threatened. The
parents should be given a careful explanation about how
protective stabilization allows the needed dental work to be
done while minimizing the possibility of accidental injury
to the patient, parent, staff, or dentist. If a child requires
extensive dental treatment and cooperation cannot be
achieved by routine psychological, physical, or pharmacologic measures, the use of general anesthesia in a controlled
atmosphere, as discussed in Chapter 18, is recommended.

INTELLECTUAL DISABILITY
Intellectual disability is a general term used when an individual’s intellectual development is significantly lower
than average and his or her ability to adapt to the environment is consequently limited.13 The condition varies
in severity and cause. A classification of intellectual disability is presented in Table 25-2. Intellectual disability
has been identified in approximately 3% of the U.S. population. For many years the potential abilities of people
with intellectual disabilities were poorly understood, and
such individuals were often treated as inferior. They were
described using the terms idiot (IQ [intelligence quotient]
below 25), imbecile (IQ from 25 to 50), and moron (IQ from
50 to 70). With the formation of the President’s Committee on Mental Retardation in 1968, emphasis was placed
on education of individuals with intellectual disabilities
to increase their social and civic responsibilities, motor
skills, and independence within society.
Although a child who scores 2 standard deviations
below the mean on the Stanford-Binet Intelligence Scale
or the Wechsler Intelligence Scale for Children may have
some degree of retardation, a diagnosis of intellectual disability is not made based on IQ alone. Both inadequate
adaptive functioning and intellectual deficiency are required to fulfill a diagnosis of intellectual disability.
A child with mild intellectual disability is one who, because of low intelligence, requires special supports in the
school environment. In the academic environment, these
children may be eligible for special education services for
students with mild intellectual disability. Educational

Chapter 25

n

Dental Problems of Children with Special Health Care Needs

A

B

C
Figure 25-9 A, The Olympic Papoose Board (Olympic Medical Corp.) secured to a dental chair. B, Patient being placed in
Papoose Board. C, Papoose Board in use.

523

524

Chapter 25

n

Dental Problems of Children with Special Health Care Needs

A

B

C
Figure 25-10 Protective stabilization for control of body and extremities. A, Patient confined in a triangular sheet with leg

straps. B, Patient in a Pedi-Wrap. C, Patient lying in a beanbag dental chair insert. (C, Courtesy Dr. Priscilla John Bond.)

programs for such children are generally simplified versions of regular school programs and usually lead to literacy and attainment of skills necessary for employment.
Most children in this group, which accounts for approximately 80% of all persons with intellectual disability, will
function acceptably as adults.
Children who are capable of some education and
partial independence but who are not expected to experience full independence as adults may be eligible for
special education services for students with moderate
intellectual disability. Classroom activities may focus on
attainment of daily living skills. Classrooms are often
designed and furnished like a home, and the curriculum
includes dressing, grooming, cooking, table setting, feed-

ing, and cleaning. Individuals with moderate intellectual
disability can be expected to master many vocational, leisure, and self-help skills within a supportive environment
with trained personnel who help them with problems
with which they may not be able to cope on their own.
A child with severe or profound intellectual disability
may present a significant challenge and may be grouped
in special education programs. A student with severe
to profound intellectual disability can achieve success
with self-help, leisure, and some vocational skills given
sufficient training and support. Group home placement
can allow individuals with severe to profound intellectual disability a measure of independence while providing
sufficient support for safety and continuing reinforcement.

Chapter 25

n

Dental Problems of Children with Special Health Care Needs

525

A

B
Figure 25-11 Protective stabilization for the extremities. A, Posey strap (Posey Co.) on wrist. B, Towel and tape on forearm.

DENTAL TREATMENT OF A PERSON
WITH INTELLECTUAL DISABILITY
Children with intellectual disability may have a higher incidence of poor oral hygiene, gingivitis, malocclusion, and
untreated caries. As the severity of intellectual disability increases, typical oral signs of clenching, bruxing, drooling,
pica, trauma, missing teeth, and self-injurious behaviors

increase. Providing dental treatment for a person with intellectual disability requires adjusting to social, intellectual,
and emotional delays. A short attention span, restlessness,
hyperactivity, and erratic emotional behavior may characterize patients with intellectual disability undergoing dental care. The dentist should assess the degree of intellectual
disability by consulting the patient’s physician for frequent
medical assessment and coordinate care when appropriate.

526

Chapter 25

n

Dental Problems of Children with Special Health Care Needs

A

B
Figure 25-12 Protective stabilization aids for the head. A, Proper positioning of the dentist’s hands, forearm, and body. B, Use
of the Olympic Papoose Board head positioner.

The following procedures have proved beneficial in establishing dentist-patient-parent-staff rapport and reducing the patient’s anxiety about dental care:
  
1.	Give the family a brief tour of the office before attempting treatment. Introduce the patient and family
(parent/caretaker/guardian) to the office staff. This
will familiarize the patient with the personnel and
facility and reduce the patient’s fear of the unknown.
Allow the patient to bring a favorite item (stuffed
animal, blanket, or toy) to hold for the visit.
2.	Be repetitive; speak slowly and in simple terms.
Make sure explanations are understood by asking
the patient if there are any questions. If the individual has an alternative communication system,
such as a picture board or electronic device, be sure
it is available to assist with dental explanations and
instructions.

3.	Give only one instruction at a time. Reward the
patient with compliments after the successful completion of each procedure.
4.	Actively listen to the patient. People with intellectual
disability often have trouble with communication,
and the dentist should be particularly sensitive to
gestures and verbal requests.
5.	Invite the parent/guardian into the operatory for
assistance and to aid in communication with the
patient when helpful.
6.	Keep appointments short. Gradually progress to more
difficult procedures (e.g., anesthesia and restorative
dentistry) after the patient has become accustomed to
the dental environment.
7.	Schedule the patient’s visit early in the day, on a
lightly scheduled day, when the dentist, the staff, and
the patient will be less fatigued.
  

Chapter 25

n

Dental Problems of Children with Special Health Care Needs

527

Table 25-2
Classification of Intellectual Disability
Degree of Mental
Disability

SB-IV

WISC-III

Communication

Special Requirements
for Dental Care

Mild

67-52

69-55

Moderate

51-36

54-40

Severe or profound

35 and below

39 and below

Should be able to speak well Treat as normal child; mild
enough for most communi- sedation or nitrous oxide–
cation needs
oxygen analgesia may be
beneficial
Has vocabulary and language Mild to moderate sedation
may be beneficial; use
skills such that the child
can communicate with oth- restraints and positive
reinforcement; general aners at a basic level
esthesia may be indicated
in cases of severe, generalized, dental decay
Mute or communicates in
Same as for moderately
grunts; little or no commuintellectually disabled
nication skills

SB-IV, Stanford-Binet Intelligence Scale, 4th ed; WISC-III, Wechsler Intelligence Scale for Children, 3rd ed.

With adequate preparation, the dentist and the staff can
provide a valuable service. By thoroughly understanding
the patient’s degree of intellectual disability and abilities,
and by exercising patience and understanding, the dentist
should have no significant problems in delivering dental
care. When cooperation does not exist, sedation or general
anesthesia may be an option.

DOWN SYNDROME (TRISOMY
21 SYNDROME)
Down syndrome is the best-known chromosomal disorder and is caused by the presence of an extra copy of
chromosome 21(trisomy 21). Medical conditions that occur more frequently in infants and children with Down
syndrome and increase the mortality of these individuals
include cardiac defects, leukemia, and upper respiratory
infections. The incidence of congenital cardiac defects
is about 40%, and because of these patients’ high susceptibility to periodontal disease, knowledge of a heart
condition is essential for dental treatment. Children with
Down syndrome have a 10- to 20-fold greater incidence
of leukemia during infancy compared with the general
population. This increased incidence of leukemia is not
maintained later in life.
Skeletal findings are an underdeveloped midface, creating a prognathic occlusal relationship. Oral findings
include mouth breathing, open bite, appearance of
macroglossia, fissured lips and tongue, angular cheilitis,
delayed eruption times, missing and malformed teeth, oligodontia, small roots, microdontia, crowding, and a low
level of caries. Children with Down syndrome experience
a high incidence of rapid, destructive periodontal disease,
which may be related to local factors such as tooth morphology, bruxism, malocclusion, and poor oral hygiene.
Certain systemic factors are also believed to contribute
to periodontal disease, including poor circulation and

decreased cellular motility of gingival fibroblasts,14 decreased humoral response, general physical deterioration
at an early age, and genetic influences. Bell and colleagues
reported that severity of tooth wear (both attrition and
erosion) was significantly greater in children with Down
syndrome than in children without the syndrome.15
Many children with Down syndrome are affectionate
and cooperative, and dental procedures can be provided
without compromise if the dentist works at a slightly
slower pace. Emphasis should be placed on preventive
dental care with frequent follow-up visits to monitor oral
hygiene. A recent study by Cheng and colleagues documented periodontal healing responses in adult patients
with Down syndrome using nonsurgical periodontal therapy in conjunction with the use of chlorhexidine rinse
twice a day and chlorhexidine gel and monthly recalls.16
Comprehensive dental care is an overall goal with alteration based on the individual’s level of functioning. Light
sedation and immobilization may be indicated in those
children who are moderately apprehensive. Severely resistive patients may require general anesthesia.
Delayed tooth eruption frequently occurs in children
with Down syndrome. For this reason, additional discussion of this disorder is presented in Chapter 19.

LEARNING DISABILITIES
Learning disabilities are neurological conditions that interfere with the individual’s ability to store, process, or
produce information. They can affect a person’s ability to
read, write, count, speak, or reason. In addition, they may
affect memory, attention, coordination, social skills, and
emotional maturity. Learning disabilities affect between
3% and 15% of the population. They occur four times
more frequently among boys than among girls.
Learning disabilities may run in families, indicating a
possible genetic factor, and are sometimes confused with

528

Chapter 25

n

Dental Problems of Children with Special Health Care Needs

intellectual disabilities, autism, deafness, and behavioral
disorders. They include conditions that have been referred
to as perceptual handicaps, brain injury, minimal brain
dysfunction, dyslexia, and developmental aphasia. The
cause of learning disabilities remains unclear. Physiologic
factors, such as minimal brain injury or damage to the central nervous system, have been implicated. The possibility
exists that severe emotional disturbances can develop as a
result of learning disabilities. This potential has prompted
the early diagnosis and treatment of affected persons.
Most children with learning disabilities accept dental
care and cause no unusual management problems for the
dentist. If a child is resistant, behavioral management and
conscious sedation techniques may be used with success.

FRAGILE X SYNDROME
Fragile X is an X-linked developmental disorder. It accounts for 30% to 50% of cases of X-linked mental disability. The defect is an abnormal gene on the terminal
portion of the long arm of an X chromosome. Males are
more vulnerable because they have only one X chromosome and are more significantly affected than females.
Numerous studies have investigated fragile X syndrome
in males, but fragile X syndrome in females has not been
investigated as extensively because the physical and
­cognitive deficits in females are usually less severe. It is
one of the most common genetic causes of learning disability, but because it is less phenotypically recognizable,
reports of orofacial findings are limited.
A history of developmental delay and hyperactivity,
and physical features such as prominent ears, long face,
prominent jaw, flattened nasal bridge, hyperextensible
joints, flat feet, mitral valve prolapse (MPV), simian creases of the palms, and postadolescent macroorchidism in
males should be considered potential indicators for fragile
X syndrome. A higher incidence of malocclusions including an open bite and crossbites has been reported.
Behavioral features such as hand slapping, hand biting, and poor eye contact are frequently seen. Fragile X
syndrome may be diagnosed in individuals with another
diagnosis such as Down syndrome or cerebral palsy.
Treatment of children with fragile X syndrome is multidisciplinary, and speech, language, and occupational
therapy is required to address the cognitive, language,
and sensory integration problems. Medical intervention
can be useful in decreasing the hyperactivity and improving the attention span. Females with fragile X syndrome
have a more favorable outcome with appropriate intervention than do males with fragile X syndrome.
The mode of dental treatment depends on the level of
developmental delay, cognitive ability, and degree of hyperactivity. Children with mild cases may be treated by scheduling short appointments and using immobilization and/
or conscious sedation. Severely affected individuals must be
treated in the operating room under general anesthesia.

FETAL ALCOHOL SPECTRUM DISORDER
Fetal alcohol spectrum disorder (FASD) is an umbrella term
that describes the range of effects that may occur with

maternal consumption of alcohol during pregnancy. It
occurs in about 40,000 babies per year, and it is likely
that the alcohol affects the normal development of the
neural crest cells. The Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention requires three facial findings, growth deficits,
and central nervous system abnormalities to make the
diagnosis, but even in the absence of the characteristic
findings, FASD should be suspected in children with
growth deficits, central nervous system abnormalities,
and a history of prenatal alcohol exposure. Physical findings may include moderate to severe growth retardation
with persistent microcephaly. There are often eye abnormalities, short palpebral fissures, a smooth philtrum, and
a thin vermilion border. Cardiac malformations include
ventricular septal defects, pulmonary artery hypoplasia,
and interruption of the aortic arch. Hearing and vestibular problems are also seen, and because the development
of speech is dependent upon an intact hearing apparatus,
children with FASD may have slurred speech and poor
receptive and language skills. The vestibular damage may
result in postural disturbances. Other associated abnormalities such as skeletal, urinary, and immune system
impairment have also been reported.
Craniofacial features include midface underdevelopment, small teeth, absent teeth, high arched palate, delayed
dental development, enamel anomalies, cleft lip or palate,
crowded incisors, excessive maxillary overjet, and open
bite. The dentist must be aware of the physical, emotional,
and mental conditions, because these may affect dental
management and treatment planning.

AUTISM SPECTRUM DISORDER
Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) includes three neurodevelopmental disorders: autism disorder, Asperger syndrome, and pervasive development disorder (PDD). The
prevalence is estimated to be 6 per 1000 children. The rise
in the rates of ASD has been attributed to increased awareness and better diagnostic tools. It occurs with greater frequency in boys than girls.
The exact cause of ASD is not completely known, although genetic factors and environmental factors may
play a role. Although the majority of cases are idiopathic,
a small percent have a known inheritance such as fragile
X syndrome, tuberous sclerosis, Rett syndrome, and Angelman syndrome. Many children with ASD present with
a typical developmental period followed by regression in
the second year.
There are three levels of impairment noted. The first
notable impairment is social, which, in some cases is extreme, with lack of eye contact and not responding to
one’s name. The second is an impairment in communication, which can result in the delay or complete lack of
spoken language. Children with Asperger syndrome do
not have a general delay in language or cognitive development; however, they often have communication difficulties, especially in sustaining conversations.
The third area of impairment in ASD is repetitive behaviors. They may include staring, floppy hands, an odd
interest in or preoccupation with specific objects. There
is great variability in presentation in children with ASD,

Chapter 25

and the diagnosis is made based upon the number of
symptoms involved.
Children with ASD have multiple medical and behavioral problems that may make dental treatment difficult.
These children often have poor muscle tone, poor coordination, drooling, a hyperactive knee jerk, and strabismus;
30% eventually develop epilepsy. Children with ASD may
have strict routines and prefer soft foods and sweetened
foods. Because of poor tongue coordination, children
with ASD tend to “pouch” food instead of swallowing.
This habit, combined with the desire for sweetened foods,
leads to increased susceptibility to caries.
Because of their tendency to adhere to routines, children with ASD may require several dental visits to acclimate to the dental environment. The use of a Papoose
Board or Pedi-Wrap and preappointment conscious sedation may be necessary and in some instances has a calming
effect on the child.

CEREBRAL PALSY
Cerebral palsy is one of the primary handicapping conditions of childhood. The incidence of cerebral palsy in the
United States, for all ages, is 1.5 to 3 cases per 1000 individuals. One newborn in approximately 200 live births
will be affected with this condition. Cerebral palsy is not
a specific disease entity but rather a collection of disabling
disorders caused by insult and permanent damage to the
brain in the prenatal and perinatal periods, during which
time the central nervous system is still maturing. This disability might involve muscle weakness, stiffness, or paralysis, poor balance or irregular gait, and uncoordinated
or involuntary movements.
Although many recognized conditions result in damage to the motor centers of the brain, in at least one third
of the cases of cerebral palsy, no discernible cause is found.
It has been well established that any factor contributing
to decreased oxygenation of the developing brain can
be responsible for brain damage. In addition, causal relationships have been established between cerebral palsy
and complications of labor or delivery; infections of the
brain, such as meningitis and encephalitis; toxemias of
pregnancy; congenital defects of the brain; kernicterus;
poisoning with certain drugs and heavy metals; and accidents resulting in trauma to the head. There is a high
correlation between premature birth and cerebral palsy.
(Approximately one third of all infants born prematurely
have a demonstrable nervous system abnormality.)
There are various types of cerebral palsy, which are
distinguished according to the neuromuscular dysfunctions observed and the extent of anatomic involvement.
Some persons may have almost imperceptible symptoms.
Others are severely disabled, with no appreciable use of
the muscles of their limbs and other voluntary muscles.
It is imperative to keep in mind that two patients with
the same type of cerebral palsy may show very disparate
symptoms. The following terms are commonly used to
designate involved areas of the body:
1.	Monoplegia—involvement of one limb only
2.	Hemiplegia—involvement of one side of the body
3.	Paraplegia—involvement of both legs only

n

Dental Problems of Children with Special Health Care Needs

529

4.	Diplegia—involvement of both legs with minimum
involvement of both arms
5.	Quadriplegia—involvement of all four limbs
The following outline provides a classification of cerebral palsy according to the type of neuromuscular dysfunction and lists a few of the basic characteristics of each type:
I.	Spastic (approximately 70% of cases)
A.	Hyperirritability of involved muscles, resulting in
exaggerated contraction when stimulated
B.	Tense, contracted muscles (e.g., spastic hemiplegia
affects one third of all children with cerebral palsy.
The hand and arm are flexed and held in against
the trunk. The foot and leg may be flexed and
rotated internally, which results in a limping gait
with circumduction of the affected leg.)
C.	Limited control of neck muscles, which results in
head rolling
D.	Lack of control of the muscles supporting the
trunk, which results in difficulty in maintaining
upright posture
E.	Lack of coordination of intraoral, perioral, and
masticatory musculature; possibility of impaired
chewing and swallowing, excessive drooling, persistent spastic tongue-thrust, and speech impairments
II.	Dyskinetic (athetosis and choreoathetosis) (approximately 15% of cases)
A.	Constant and uncontrolled motion of involved
muscles
B.	Succession of slow, twisting, or writhing involuntary movements (athetosis) or quick, jerky movements (choreoathetosis)
C.	Frequent involvement of neck musculature, which
results in excessive movement of the head (Hypertonicity of these muscles may cause the head to be
held back, with the mouth constantly open and
the tongue positioned anteriorly or protruded.)
D.	Possibility of frequent, uncontrolled jaw movements,
causing abrupt closure of the jaws or severe bruxism
E.	Frequent hypotonicity of perioral musculature,
with mouth breathing, tongue protrusion, and
excessive drooling
F.	Facial grimacing
G.	Chewing and swallowing difficulties
H.	Speech problems
III.	Ataxic (approximately 5% of cases)
A.	Inability of involved muscles to contract
­completely so that voluntary movements can be
only partially performed
B.	Poor sense of balance and uncoordinated voluntary
movements (e.g., stumbling or staggering gait or
difficulty in grasping objects)
C.	Possibility of tremors and an uncontrollable trembling or quivering when attempting voluntary tasks
IV.	Mixed (approximately 10% of cases)
A.	Combination of characteristics of more than one
type of cerebral palsy (e.g., mixed spastic-athetoid
quadriplegia)
Two additional forms of cerebral palsy have been described but occur infrequently. In hypotonia, the muscles
are flaccid (i.e., there is an inability to elicit muscle activity on volitional stimulation). In rigidity, the muscles are

530

Chapter 25

n

Dental Problems of Children with Special Health Care Needs

in a constant state of contraction. The condition is characterized by prolonged periods in which the muscles of
the extremities or trunk remain rigid, resisting any effort
to move them.
In many patients with cerebral palsy, certain neonatal reflexes may persist long after the age at which they
normally disappear. These primitive reflexes are usually
modified or are progressively replaced as the subcortical
dominance of the infant’s behavior is suppressed by higher centers of the maturing central nervous system. Three
of the most common reactions, which a dentist should
recognize, are the following:
1.	Asymmetric tonic neck reflex. If the patient’s head is
suddenly turned to one side, the arm and leg on the
side to which the face is turned extend and stiffen.
The limbs on the opposite side flex.
2.	Tonic labyrinthine reflex. If the patient’s head suddenly
falls backward while the patient is supine, the back may
assume the position known as postural extension; the legs
and arms straighten out, and the neck and back arch.
3.	Startle reflex. This reflex, which is frequently observed
in persons with cerebral palsy, consists of sudden,
involuntary, often forceful bodily movements.
This reaction is produced when the patient is surprised
by stimuli, such as sudden noises or unexpected
movements by other people.
Because the motor involvement in cerebral palsy results
from irreversible damage to the developing brain, other
symptoms of organic brain damage may also be present.
The fact that these other symptoms are frequently seen
underscores the premise that cerebral palsy does not denote one specific disease entity. Rather, it is a complex of
disabling conditions, the clinical manifestations of which
depend on the extent and location of damage to the brain.
The following are some common manifestations:
  
1.	Intellectual disability. Approximately 60% of persons
with cerebral palsy demonstrate some degree of intellectual disability.
2.	Seizure disorders. Seizures are an accompanying condition in 30% to 50% of cases; they occur primarily
during infancy and early childhood. Most seizures can
be controlled with anticonvulsant medications.
3.	Sensory deficits or dysfunctions. Impairment of hearing
is more common than in the normal population, and
eye disorders affect approximately 35% of persons
with cerebral palsy. The most common visual defect is
strabismus.
4.	Speech disorders. More than half of patients with
cerebral palsy have some speech problem—usually
dysarthria, an inability to articulate well because of
lack of control of the speech muscles.
5.	Joint contractures. Persons with spasticity and rigidity
demonstrate abnormal limb postures and contractures
during growth and at maturity, primarily because of
disuse of muscle groups.
No intraoral anomalies are unique to persons with
cerebral palsy. However, several conditions are more
­
common or more severe than in the general population.
These conditions are as follows:
1.	Periodontal disease. Periodontal disease and poor oral
hygiene occur with great frequency in persons with

cerebral palsy. Often the patient will not be physically
able to brush or floss adequately. When oral hygiene
measures must be provided for the person by another
individual, they may be performed infrequently and
inadequately. Diet may also be significant; children
who have difficulty chewing and swallowing tend
to eat soft foods, which are easily swallowed and are
high in carbohydrates. Patients with cerebral palsy
and who take phenytoin to control seizure activity
will generally have a degree of gingival hyperplasia.
2.	Dental caries. The data are conflicting regarding the
incidence of dental caries in patients with cerebral
palsy compared with its incidence in the general
population. Except among institutionalized patients,
the incidence of caries does not seem to be significantly greater among persons with cerebral palsy.
3.	Malocclusions. The prevalence of malocclusions in
patients with cerebral palsy is approximately twice
that in the general population. Commonly observed
conditions include noticeable protrusion of the
maxillary anterior teeth, excessive overbite and overjet, open bites, and unilateral crossbites. A primary
cause may be a disharmonious relationship between
intraoral and perioral muscles. Uncoordinated and
uncontrolled movements of jaws, lips, and tongue
are observed with greater frequency in patients with
cerebral palsy. This may result in impaired chewing
and swallowing, excessive drooling, tongue-thrust,
and speech impairment.
4.	Bruxism. Bruxism is commonly observed in patients
with athetoid cerebral palsy. Severe occlusal attrition of the primary and permanent dentition may
be noted, with the resulting loss of vertical interarch
dimension. Temporomandibular joint disorders may
be sequelae of this condition in adult patients.
5.	Trauma. Persons with cerebral palsy are more susceptible to trauma, particularly to the maxillary anterior
teeth. This situation is related to the increased tendency to fall, along with a diminished extensor reflex to
cushion such falls, and the frequent increased flaring
of the maxillary anterior teeth. Susceptibilities also
include aspiration and ingestion of a foreign body.
  
To an uninformed dentist, a person with cerebral palsy
who has involuntary movements of the limbs and head
might be perceived as an uncooperative and unmanageable patient. In addition, patients who have unintelligible speech, uncontrollable jaw movements, and spastic
tongue are often erroneously assumed to be intellectually
delayed. A clinician who is not knowledgeable about cerebral palsy and other physically and intellectually disabling conditions may feel uncomfortable about treating
such patients and may refuse to do so.
In providing treatment for children with cerebral palsy, it is imperative that a dentist evaluate each patient
thoroughly in terms of personal characteristics, symptoms, and behavior and then proceed as conditions and
needs dictate.
The dentist should never make assumptions about the
degree of a child’s physical or intellectual impairments
without first acquiring the facts. Taking a thorough medical and dental history is very important, and the parent

Chapter 25

or guardian should be interviewed before the initiation
of any treatment. It may also be beneficial to consult the
patient’s physician regarding the patient’s medical status.
A patient with cerebral palsy and who has involuntary head movements may be cognizant of the need to
minimize these movements while receiving dental care.
Paradoxically the patient’s own endeavors to control
these movements may only exacerbate the problem.
Therefore it is imperative that all dental personnel be
empathic about the fears and frustrations that such a
person experiences. The importance of maintaining a
calm, friendly, and professional atmosphere cannot be
overemphasized.
The following suggestions are offered to the clinician
as being of practical significance in treating a patient with
cerebral palsy:
1.	Consider treating a patient who uses a wheelchair
in the wheelchair. Many patients express such a
preference, and it is frequently more practical for the
dentist. For a young patient, the wheelchair may be
tipped back into the dentist’s lap.
2.	If a patient is to be transferred to the dental chair,
ask about a preference for the mode of transfer. If
the patient has no preference, the two-person lift is
recommended.
3.	Make an effort to stabilize the patient’s head
throughout all phases of dental treatment.
4.	Try to place and maintain the patient in the midline
of the dental chair, with arms and legs as close to
the body as feasible.
5.	Keep the patient’s back slightly elevated to minimize
difficulties in swallowing. (It is advisable not to have
the patient in a completely supine position.)
6.	When the patient has been placed in the dental
chair, determine the patient’s degree of comfort and
assess the position of the extremities. Do not force
the limbs into unnatural positions. Consider the use
of pillows, towels, and other measures for trunk and
limb support.
7.	Use stabilization judiciously to control flailing
movements of the extremities.
8.	For control of involuntary jaw movements, choose
from a variety of mouth props. Patient preference
should weigh heavily because a patient with cerebral
palsy may be very apprehensive about the ability to
control swallowing. Such appliances may also trigger
the strong gag reflex that many of these patients
possess. Allow frequent time-outs for the patient to
regroup, relax, and breathe normally.
9.	To minimize startle reflex reactions, avoid presenting stimuli such as abrupt movements, noises, and
lights without forewarning the patient.
10.	Introduce intraoral stimuli slowly to avoid eliciting a
gag reflex or to make it less severe.
11.	Consider the use of the rubber dam, a highly recommended technique, for restorative procedures.
12.	Work efficiently and quickly and minimize patient
time in the chair to decrease fatigue of the involved
muscles.
13.	Sedation or general anesthesia may be an option for
more complex patients.

n

Dental Problems of Children with Special Health Care Needs

531

SPINA BIFIDA AND LATEX ALLERGY
Although the etiology of spina bifida is unknown, it is
thought to be the result of a genetic predisposition whose
manifestation is triggered by the environment. There are
two common forms of this neural tube defect, spina bifida
occulta and myelomeningocele. Spina bifida occulta (i.e.,
closed) presents with skin covering an area where tissue
protrudes through a bony cleft in the vertebral column.
These children may develop foot weakness or bowel and
bladder sphincter disturbances. Myelomeningocele (spina
bifida aperta, i.e., open) is the most severe because the
spinal cord, spinal fluid, and membranes protrude in a
sac through the defect. These children can suffer from
hydrocephalus, paralysis, orthopedic deformities, and
genitourinary abnormalities. If the mother takes folic acid
during the first 6 weeks of pregnancy, over 50% of neural
tube defects can be prevented.
Children with neural tube defects are at higher risk for
caries secondary to poor hygiene, poor nutritional intake,
and long-term drug therapy. They are also at higher risk for
latex allergy because they are frequently exposed to latex
as a result of undergoing procedures in which latex products are used. Therefore Nettis and colleagues17 recommend that all patients be screened for conditions such as
spina bifida and exposure to recurrent surgical procedures,
and for a history of atopy, cross-reactive food allergies (i.e.,
allergies to banana, avocado, kiwi, and chestnuts, which
may sensitize allergic patients to latex exposure), and previous reactions to natural rubber latex.
For all patients with a latex allergy or latex allergy
risk factors, all equipment that comes in intimate contact with the patient should be made of nonlatex substitutes. Nettis and colleagues17 suggest avoiding handling
of nonlatex products while wearing latex gloves or with
unwashed hands to prevent the transfer of latex allergens
to nonlatex products. They suggest that the ideal time to
schedule dental appointments for such individuals is at
the beginning of a working session, such as in the morning or after a vacation when the office has been closed.
This will allow for settling of airborne latex particles. Another good scheduling time is after the office has been
professionally vacuumed and cleaned to remove latextainted cornstarch. Mild irritant reactions to latex can be
managed with immediate removal of the rubber object
and administration of an antihistamine. However, acute
systemic reactions (anaphylaxis) require immediate treatment with epinephrine injection 1:1000 USP and may necessitate emergency resuscitation (call 911).

RESPIRATORY DISEASES
ASTHMA (REACTIVE AIRWAY DISEASE)
Asthma is a common childhood disease, affecting 1 in 10
children. Although often thought of as acute respiratory
distress brought on by environmental factors, asthma is
a chronic airway disease characterized by inflammation,
increased mucus production, and bronchial constriction.
Asthma is a diffuse obstructive disease of the airway
caused by edema of the mucous membranes, increased

532

Chapter 25

n

Dental Problems of Children with Special Health Care Needs

mucous secretions, and spasm of smooth muscle. It is
twice as common in prepubertal boys but affects both
genders equally during adolescence and adulthood. The
etiology includes biochemical, immunologic, infectious,
endocrine, and psychological factors. The typical symptoms of asthma are coughing, wheezing, chest tightness,
and dyspnea. The clinical onset of an episode may occur
over minutes (acute) or hours and days. An acute attack
is associated with exposure to irritants such as cold air,
fumes, or dust, and it may develop in minutes. An attack
developing over days is usually precipitated by a viral respiratory infection. Severe bronchial obstruction results
in labored breathing, wheezing, tachypnea, profuse perspiration, cyanosis, hyperventilation, tachycardia, and
sometimes chest pain. A dental procedure constitutes an
acute irritant to the airways of the asthmatic child and
may precipitate an attack.
Fortunately, three fourths of childhood asthma is
mild, with minimal daily symptoms and short-lived exacerbations. Before initiating dental treatment, the dentist
should know what are the frequency and severity of the
attacks, what are the triggering agents, when the patient
was hospitalized and/or in the emergency department,
when the last attack occurred, what medications the patient takes, and what limitations on activity the patient
may have. Patients taking systemic corticosteroids and
those who were hospitalized or in the emergency department in the preceding year should be treated with
caution because they are at higher risk of morbidity and
mortality. Sometimes, deferring the dental visit until the
patient’s asthma is controlled is the best approach.
Patients who use bronchodilators should take a dose
before their appointment, and they should bring their inhalers or nebulizers into the dental office in case trouble
arises. Acute symptoms may be prevented by the use of
the child’s bronchodilator (inhaled β2 receptor agonist
such as albuterol). Behavioral methods are used to reduce anxiety, and nitrous oxide–oxygen analgesia may
be helpful. Hydroxyzine hydrochloride (Vistaril) and
diazepam (Valium) have been successful in alleviating
anxiety. Barbiturates and narcotics are not indicated because of their potential for histamine release, leading to
a bronchospasm. Aspirin compounds and nonsteroidal
anti-inflammatory agents are contraindicated because
about 4% of patients experience wheezing after taking
these drugs. Acetaminophen is recommended. Positioning a child with mild asthmatic symptoms in an upright
or semiupright position for the dental procedure may be
beneficial.
Oral findings of children with moderate to severe asthma include higher caries rates, decreased salivary rates, increased prevalence of oral mucosal changes characteristic
of chronic mouth breathers, and increased levels of gingivitis. Increased incidence of orofacial abnormalities such
as high palatal vault, more posterior crossbites, greater
overjets, and increased facial height is also seen.
Dental goals are similar to those for other patients,
with care taken to avoid the potential for dental materials and products to exacerbate the asthma. The patient’s
pulmonary function, propensity for developing an attack,
immune status, and adrenal status should be evaluated

prior to dental treatment. Emergency treatment for a
person with asthma and who is in respiratory distress requires discontinuing the dental procedure, reassuring the
patient, and opening the airway. Staff should administer
100% oxygen while placing the patient in an upright or
comfortable position. Keeping the airway open, administer the patient’s β2 agonist with an inhaler or nebulizer.
If there is no improvement, administer subcutaneous
epinephrine (0.01 mg/kg of 1:1000 solution) and obtain
medical assistance immediately.

BRONCHOPULMONARY DYSPLASIA
Bronchopulmonary dysplasia is a chronic lung disease
usually resulting from the occurrence during infancy of
respiratory distress syndrome that requires prolonged
ventilation with a high concentration of inspired oxygen. Chronic lung changes are more likely to occur in the
premature infant. The incidence is approximately 60%
in infants weighing less than 1000 g at birth. With the
increased survival of low-birthweight infants, the prevalence of bronchopulmonary dysplasia has increased. The
lung pathology of children with bronchopulmonary dysplasia shows evidence of bronchial ulceration, necrosis
with plugging of bronchiolar lumina, and inflammatory
cells. This bronchiolar injury compromises further lung
development. Inflammatory changes and bronchiolar fibrosis lead to increased airway resistance and contribute
to the hypoxemia seen in infants with bronchopulmonary
dysplasia. Some children with bronchopulmonary dysplasia develop right ventricular hypertrophy (cor pulmonale). Other significant pulmonary complications include
tracheal stenosis, upper airway obstruction secondary
to subglottic cysts, and hoarseness because of partial or
complete vocal cord paralysis. About 20% of infants with
bronchopulmonary dysplasia die within the first year of
life. The major causes of death are cor pulmonale, respiratory infections, and sudden death.
An increased oxygen supply must be provided to prevent hypoxic pulmonary vasoconstriction and to decrease the work of breathing. The nasal cannula provides
continuous oxygen delivery, which results in fewer fluctuations in oxygen tension. Weaning the child off oxygen
is possible with improved lung function and lung size.
Children who develop cor pulmonale may require diuretic therapy to prevent congestive heart failure.
Dental care for children with bronchopulmonary dysplasia requires more chair time than usual. These children
often spend a significant part of their early lives in the
hospital and exhibit significant oral defensiveness.
After the initial dental evaluation, consultation with a
pulmonologist is beneficial to plan safe dental treatment
for the patient. If the dental patient is taking oxygen continuously via a nasal cannula, short appointments with
frequent breaks are necessary to prevent the development of pulmonary vasoconstriction. Parents of children
with bronchopulmonary dysplasia may need to provide
additional oral hygiene for their children when these
­
children are required to eat frequent small meals to maintain the proper caloric intake. Any nonemergent dental
care should be avoided when the patient is not doing well
medically.

Chapter 25

CYSTIC FIBROSIS
Cystic fibrosis is an autosomal-recessive disorder occurring in 1 of every 2000 births. It is the most common
lethal genetic disorder affecting whites. The genetically
altered protein affects exocrine gland function. The defective exocrine gland function leads to microobstruction of
the pancreas, which results in cystic degeneration of the
pancreas and, ultimately, a digestive enzyme deficiency
producing malabsorption of nutrients.
The defective gene products cause abnormal water and
electrolyte transport across epithelial cells, which results
in a chronic disease of the respiratory and gastrointestinal
system, elevated levels of electrolytes in sweat, and impaired reproductive function.
In the lungs, retention of mucus occurs, which causes
obstructive lung disease and increased frequency of infections. As the progressive lung disease develops, there
is an increase in chest diameter, clubbing of the fingers
and toes, decreased exercise tolerance, and a chronic
productive cough. Before advances in antibiotic therapy,
physical therapy, and nutritional supplementation, these
individuals rarely survived childhood. The median life expectancy has been increased to 39 years for women and
41 years for men. Death is most frequently the result of
pneumonia and anoxia after a long period of respiratory
insufficiency. Cystic fibrosis–related diabetes is becoming
more common as patients live longer.
Children with cystic fibrosis have a high incidence of
tooth discoloration when systemic tetracyclines are taken
during tooth formation. With the advent of alternative an-

n

Dental Problems of Children with Special Health Care Needs

533

tibiotics, the incidence of tooth discoloration is decreasing.
The incidence of dental caries in children with cystic fibrosis is low secondary to long-term antibiotic therapy, buffering capacity of excess calcium in the saliva, and pancreatic
enzyme replacement therapy. There is a high incidence of
mouth breathing and open-bite malocclusion associated
with chronic nasal and sinus obstruction. Patients with
cystic fibrosis may prefer to be treated in a more upright
position to allow them to clear secretions more easily. The
use of sedative agents that interfere with pulmonary function should be avoided, and the patient’s physician should
be contacted before nitrous oxide–oxygen sedation is used
in a patient exhibiting evidence of severe emphysema.

HEARING LOSS
Hearing loss (deafness) is a disability that is often overlooked because it is not obvious. Total hearing loss affects
1.8 million people, and there are 14 million hearingimpaired individuals in the United States. About 1 in 600
neonates has a congenital hearing loss. During the neonatal period, many more acquire hearing loss from other
associated conditions. Almost inevitably, speech is affected.
If an impairment is severe enough that dentist and child
cannot communicate verbally, the dentist must use sight,
taste, and touch to communicate and to allow the child
to learn about dental experiences. Table 25-3 shows how
speech and psychological problems relate to various degrees of hearing loss. Many times, mild hearing losses are
not diagnosed, which leads to management problems
because of the child’s misunderstanding of instructions;

Table 25-3
Implications of Auditory Disability Relative to International Standards Organization (ISO)
Reference Levels*
ISO (DB)

Disability

Speech Comprehension

Psychological Problems in Children

0
25

Insignificant
Slight

40

Mild-moderate

55

Marked

70

Severe

90

Extreme

Little or no difficulty
None
Difficulty with faint speech; lanChild may show a slight verbal deficit.
guage and speech development
within normal limits
Frequent difficulty with normal
Psychological problems can be recogspeech at 3 feet (91.4 cm); lannized.
guage skills are mildly affected
Child is likely to be educationally
Frequent difficulty with loud
retarded, with more pronounced emospeech at 3 feet (91.4 cm); diffitional and social problems than in
culty understanding with hearing
children with normal hearing.
aid in school situation
May understand only shouts or
The prelingually deaf show pronounced
amplified speech at 1 foot (30.5
educational retardation and evident
cm) from ear
emotional and social problems.
Usually no understanding of speech The prelingually deaf usually show
severe intellectual disability and emoeven when amplified; child does
tional underdevelopment.
not rely on hearing for
communication.

*Reference levels are in decibels relative to threshold in young patients with normal hearing.
Adapted from Goetzinger CP: The psychology of hearing impairment, In: Katz J, ed. Handbook of clinical audiology, ed 2, Baltimore, 1978,
Williams & Wilkins.

534

Chapter 25

n

Dental Problems of Children with Special Health Care Needs

children with more severe hearing losses already have
psychological and social disturbances that make dental
behavior management more complex. Parents may suspect
profound hearing loss if their infant does not respond to
ordinary sounds or voices. Early identification and correction of hearing loss are essential for the normal deve­
lopment of communication skills. No abnormal dental
findings are associated with hearing loss.
The following are known causes of hearing loss:
•	Prenatal factors
•	Viral infections, such as rubella and influenza
•	Ototoxic drugs, such as aspirin, streptomycin, neomycin, kanamycin
•	Congenital syphilis
•	Heredity disorders (e.g., Alport, Arnold-Chiari, Crouzon, Hunter, Klippel-Feil, Stickler, Treacher Collins,
and Waardenburg syndromes)
•	Perinatal factors
•	Toxemia late in pregnancy
•	Prematurity
•	Birth injury
•	Anoxia
•	Erythroblastosis fetalis
•	Postnatal factors
•	Viral infections, such as mumps, measles, chickenpox,
influenza, poliomyelitis, meningitis
•	Injuries
The following should be considered in the treatment
of a hearing-impaired patient:
  
1.	Prepare the patient and parent before the first visit
with a welcome letter describing what is to be done
and including a medical history form.
2.	Let the patient and parent determine, during the
initial appointment, how the patient desires to communicate (i.e., interpreter, lip reading, sign language,
note writing [for child who can read], or a combination of these). Look for ways to improve communication. It is useful to learn some basic sign language.
Face the patient and speak slowly at a natural pace
and directly to the patient without shouting. Exaggeration of facial expressions and the use of slang
make lip reading difficult. Even the best lip-readers
comprehend only 30% to 40% of what is said.
3.	Assess speech, language ability, and degree of hearing impairment when taking the patient’s complete
medical history. Identify the age of onset, type,
degree, and cause of hearing loss, and determine
whether any other family members are affected.
4.	Enhance visibility for communication. Watch the
patient’s expression. Make sure the patient understands what the dental equipment is, what is going
to happen, and how it will feel. Have the patient
use hand gestures if a problem arises. If appropriate,
write out and display information.
5.	Reassure the patient with physical contact; hold the
patient’s hand initially, or place a hand reassuringly
on the patient’s shoulder while the patient maintains visual contact. Without visual contact, the
child may be startled. Explain to the patient if you
must leave the room.
6.	Use the tell-show-feel-do approach. Use visual aids
and allow the patient to see the instruments, and

demonstrate how they work. Hearing-impaired children may be very sensitive to vibration.
7.	Display confidence; use smiles and reassuring
gestures to build up confidence and reduce anxiety.
Allow extra time for all appointments.
8.	Avoid blocking the patient’s visual field, especially
with a rubber dam.
9.	Adjust the hearing aid (if the patient has one) before
the handpiece is in operation because a hearing aid
amplifies all sounds. Many times the patient will
prefer to have it turned off.
10.	Make sure the parent or patient understands explanations of diagnosis, treatment, and payment. Deaf
persons have different levels of skill with English.
Use of an interpreter is extremely helpful.

VISUAL IMPAIRMENT
Total visual impairment (blindness) affects more than
30 million people. The list that follows gives some of the
known causes of visual impairment; however, in more than
35% of those affected, the cause is either unknown or unreported. Blindness is not an all-or-nothing phenomenon; a
person is considered to be affected by blindness if the visual
acuity does not exceed 20/200 in the better eye with corrective lenses, or if the acuity is greater than 20/200 but is
accompanied by a visual field of no greater than 20 degrees.
The following are known causes of visual impairment:
•	Prenatal causes
•	Optic atrophy
•	Microphthalmos
•	Cataracts
•	Colobomas
•	Dermoid and other tumors
•	Toxoplasmosis
•	Cytomegalic inclusion disease
•	Syphilis
•	Rubella
•	Tuberculous meningitis
•	Developmental abnormalities of the orbit
•	Postnatal causes
•	Trauma
•	Retrolental fibroplasia
•	Hypertension
•	Premature birth
•	Polycythemia vera
•	Hemorrhagic disorders
•	Leukemia
•	Diabetes mellitus
•	Glaucoma
  
Visual impairment may be only one aspect of a child’s
disability. For example, a patient with congenital rubella
may have deafness, mental retardation, congenital heart
disease, and dental defects, as well as blindness resulting
from congenital cataracts. Total visual impairment is one
disorder that may result in frequent hospitalizations, separation from family, and slow social development. Because
the capabilities of a child with blindness are difficult to assess, the child may be considered developmentally delayed.
Consideration must be given to every developmental
aspect of a child with blindness. Early in development,
the parents may experience guilt and either overprotect

Chapter 25

or reject the child; this can result in a lack of development
of self-help skills and delayed development in general,
which is often misinterpreted as intellectual disability.
Assessment of parental attitudes is of primary importance
in behavioral management. In addition, children with
blindness may exhibit self-stimulating activities, such as
eye pressing, finger flicking, rocking, and head banging.
Therefore assessment of the child’s socialization is useful
in the management of dental behavior.
A distinction should be made between children who
at one time had sight and those who have not and thus
cannot form visual concepts. More explanation is needed
for children in the latter category to help them perceive
the dental environment. Dentists should realize that congenitally visually impaired children need a greater display
of affection and love early in life and that they differ intellectually from children who are not congenitally visually
impaired. Although explanation is accomplished through
touching and hearing, reinforcement takes place through
smelling and tasting. The modalities of listening, touching, tasting, and smelling are extremely important in
helping these children learn coping behavior. Reports indicate that, once speech is developed, the other senses assume heightened importance and other development can
occur that is comparable with that in children with sight.
Reports also reveal that motor activity affects the development of language and perception. Visually impaired
children tend to have more accidents than other children
during the early years while they are acquiring motor skills.
Hypoplastic teeth and trauma to the anterior teeth
have been reported to occur with greater than average frequency in visually impaired children. Such children are
also more likely to have gingival inflammation because
of their inability to see and remove plaque. Other dental
abnormalities occur with the same frequency as in the
general population.
Before initiating dental treatment for a visually impaired
child, the dentist should keep the following points in mind:
1.	Determine the degree of visual impairment. (Can
the patient tell light from dark?)
2.	If the patient is accompanied by a companion, find
out if the companion is an interpreter. If he or she is
not, address the patient.
3.	Establish rapport; afterward offer verbal and physical
reassurance. Avoid expressions of pity or references
to visual impairment as an affliction.
4.	In guiding the patient to the operatory, ask if the
patient desires assistance. Do not grab, move, or
stop the patient without verbal warning. Encourage
the parent to accompany the child.
5.	Paint a picture in the mind of the visually impaired
child by describing the office setting and treatment.
Always give the patient adequate descriptions before
performing treatment procedures. It is important to
use the same office setting for each dental visit to
allay the patient’s anxiety.
6.	Introduce other office personnel very informally.
7.	When making physical contact, do so reassuringly.
Holding the patient’s hand often promotes relaxation.
8.	Allow the patient to ask questions about the course of
treatment and answer them, keeping in mind that the
patient is highly individual, sensitive, and responsive.

n

Dental Problems of Children with Special Health Care Needs

535

9.	Allow a patient who wears eyeglasses to keep them
on for protection and security.
10.	Rather than using the tell-show-feel-do approach, invite the patient to touch, taste, or smell, recognizing
that these senses are acute. Avoid sight references.
11.	Describe in detail the instruments and objects to be
placed in the patient’s mouth. Demonstrate a rubber
cup on the patient’s fingernail.
12.	Because strong tastes may be rejected, use smaller
quantities of dental materials with such characteristics.
13.	Some patients may be photophobic. Ask parents
about light sensitivity and allow these patients to
wear sunglasses.
14.	Explain the procedures of oral hygiene and then
place the patient’s hand over yours as you slowly
but deliberately guide the toothbrush.
15.	Use audiocassette tapes and braille dental pamphlets
explaining specific dental procedures to supplement
information and decrease chair time.
16.	Announce exits from and entrances to the dental
operatory cheerfully. Keep distractions to a minimum, and avoid unexpected loud noises.
17.	Limit providers of the patient’s dental care to one
dentist whenever possible.
18.	Maintain a relaxed atmosphere. Remember that your
  patient cannot see your smile.
The provision of dental care to a visually impaired child
is facilitated by an in-depth understanding of the patient’s
background. A team approach by all health professionals
involved in the care of the child is ideal. Disease prevention and continuity of care are of utmost importance.

HEART DISEASE
Heart disease can be divided into two general types:
congenital and acquired. Because individuals with heart
disease may require special precautions during dental
treatment, such as antibiotic coverage for prevention of
infective endocarditis (IE), a dentist should closely evaluate the medical histories of all patients to ascertain their
cardiovascular status. In April 2007 the American Heart
Association presented recommendations to conserve the
use of antibiotics for the prevention of IE to minimize the
risk of developing resistance to current regimens.18

CONGENITAL HEART DISEASE
The incidence of congenital heart disease is approximately 9 in 1000 births. The following is the relative incidence
of congenital heart defects (Toronto Heart Registry):
Defect
Ventricular septal defect
Patent ductus arteriosus
Tetralogy of Fallot
Transposition of the great vessels
Atrial septal defect
Pulmonary stenosis
Coarctation of the aorta
Aortic stenosis
Tricuspid atresia
All others

Percent
22
17
11
8
7
7
6
5
3
14

The cause of a congenital heart defect is obscure. Generally it is a result of aberrant embryonic development of a

536

Chapter 25

n

Dental Problems of Children with Special Health Care Needs

normal structure or the failure of a structure to progress beyond an early stage of embryonic development. Only rarely
can a causal factor be identified in congenital heart disease.
Maternal rubella and chronic maternal alcohol abuse are
known to interfere with normal cardiogenesis. If a parent
or a sibling has a congenital heart defect, the chances that
a child will be born with a heart defect are about 5 to 10
times greater than average. Congenital heart disease can be
classified into two groups: acyanotic and cyanotic.

Acyanotic Congenital Heart Disease
Acyanotic congenital heart disease is characterized by
minimal or no cyanosis and is commonly divided into
two major groups. The first group consists of defects that
cause left-to-right shunting of blood within the heart.
This group includes ventricular septal defect and atrial
septal defect. Clinical manifestations of these defects can
include congestive heart failure, pulmonary congestion,
heart murmur, labored breathing, and cardiomegaly.
The second major group consists of defects that cause
obstruction (e.g., aortic stenosis and coarctation of the
aorta). The clinical manifestations can include labored
breathing and congestive heart failure.

Cyanotic Congenital Heart Disease
Cyanotic congenital heart disease is characterized by rightto-left shunting of blood within the heart. Cyanosis is often
observed even during minor exertion. Examples of such
defects are tetralogy of Fallot, transposition of the great
vessels, pulmonary stenosis, and tricuspid atresia. Clinical
manifestations can include cyanosis, hypoxic spells, poor
physical development, heart murmurs, and clubbing of
the terminal phalanges of the fingers (Fig. 25-13).

ACQUIRED HEART DISEASE
Rheumatic Fever
Rheumatic fever is a serious inflammatory disease that
occurs as a delayed sequela to pharyngeal infection with
group A streptococci. Rheumatic fever is a ­commonly diagnosed cause of acquired heart disease in patients under 40 years of age. The mechanism by which the group
A Streptococcus strains initiate the disease is unknown.
The infection can involve the heart, joints, skin, central
nervous system, and subcutaneous tissue. In general the
incidence of rheumatic fever is decreasing. However, the
incidence after exudative pharyngitis in epidemics is approximately 3%. (The incidence is much lower when the
streptococcal pharyngitis is less severe.)
Although rheumatic fever can occur at any age, it is
rare in infancy. It appears most commonly in children
between the ages of 6 and 15 years. Rheumatic fever is
most prevalent in temperate zones and at high altitudes
and is more common and severe in children who live in
substandard conditions. The clinical symptoms of rheumatic fever vary.
Cardiac involvement is the most significant pathologic
sequela of rheumatic fever; carditis develops in approximately 50% of patients. Cardiac involvement can be fatal
during the acute phase or can lead to chronic rheumatic
heart disease as a result of scarring and deformity of heart
valves.

Figure 25-13 The hand of a 9-year-old boy with tetralogy of

Fallot. Clubbing of the terminal phalanges is apparent.

Infective Endocarditis
Infective Endocarditis (IE) is one of the most serious infections of humans. It is characterized by microbial infection
of the heart valves or endocardium in proximity to congenital or acquired cardiac defects. IE has been classically
divided into acute and subacute forms. The acute form
is a fulminating disease that usually occurs when microorganisms of high pathogenicity attack a normal heart,
causing erosive destruction of the valves. Microorganisms
associated with the acute form include Staphylococcus,
group A Streptococcus, and Pneumonococcus. In contrast,
subacute IE usually develops in persons with preexisting
congenital cardiac disease or rheumatic valvular lesions.
Surgical placement of prosthetic heart valves can also predispose a patient to IE; heart valve infections occur in 1%
to 2% of such patients. The subacute form is commonly
caused by viridans streptococci, microorganisms common to the flora of the oral cavity.
Embolization is a characteristic feature of IE. Microorganisms introduced into the bloodstream may colonize
the endocardium at or near congenital valvular defects,
valves damaged by rheumatic fever, or prosthetic heart
valves. These vegetations, composed of microorganisms
and fibrous exudate, may separate and, depending on
whether the endocarditis involves the left or right side of
the heart, be propelled into the systemic or pulmonary
circulation.
The clinical symptoms of IE include low, irregular fever (afternoon or evening peaks) with sweating, malaise,
anorexia, weight loss, and arthralgia. Inflammation of the
endocardium increases cardiac destruction, and murmurs
subsequently develop. Painful fingers and toes and skin
lesions are also important symptoms. Laboratory findings
can include leukocytosis and neutrophilia and normocytic, normochromic anemia. The erythrocyte sedimentation rate is rapid.

Infective Endocarditis Prophylaxis
Transient bacteremia is an important initiating factor in
IE. Procedures known to precipitate transient bacteremias

Chapter 25

Box 25-1
Dental Procedures for Which Endocarditis
Prophylaxis Is Reasonable for Highest Risk
Patients
All dental procedures that involve manipulation of gingival tissue or the periapical region of teeth or perforation
of the oral mucosa*
*PRN prophylaxis: routine anesthetic injections through noninfected
tissue, taking dental radiographs, placement of removable prosthodontic or orthodontic appliances, adjustment of orthodontic appliances,
placement of orthodontic brackets, shedding of deciduous teeth, and
bleeding from trauma to the lips or oral mucosa.
From Wilson W et al: Prevention of infective endocarditis: guidelines
from American Heart Association, Circulation 116:1736-1754, 2007.
Reprinted with permission © 2007, American Heart Association, Inc.

Box 25-2
Cardiac Conditions Associated with the
Highest Risk of Adverse Outcome from
Endocarditis for Which Prophylaxis with
Dental Procedures Is Reasonable
Prosthetic cardiac valve or prosthetic material used for
cardiac valve repair
Previous infective endocarditis
Congenital heart disease (CHD)*
Unrepaired cyanotic CHD, including palliative shunts
and conduits
Completely repaired congenital heart defect with prosthetic material or device, whether placed by surgery or by
catheter intervention, during the first 6 months after the
procedure†
Repaired CHD with residual defects at the site or adjacent to the site of prosthetic patch or prosthetic device
(which inhibits endothelialization)
Cardiac transplantation recipients who develop cardiac
valvulopathy
*Except for the conditions listed above, antibiotic prophylaxis is no
longer recommended for any other form of CHD.
†Prophylaxis is reasonable because endothelialization of prosthetic
material occurs within 6 months after the procedure.
From Wilson W et al: Prevention of infective endocarditis: guidelines
from American Heart Association, Circulation 116:1736-1754, 2007.
Reprinted with permission © 2007, American Heart Association, Inc.

in dentistry and for which IE prophylaxis is or is not recommended are included in Box 25-1.
Certain heart conditions are associated with the
highest risk of adverse outcomes from IE (Box 25-2).
Any dental patient who has a history of congenital
heart disease or rheumatic heart disease or who has a
prosthetic heart valve should be considered susceptible.
The American Heart Association’s antibiotic recommendations for the prevention of bacterial endocarditis are
presented in Box 25-3.
The recent AHA revision concluded that only a small
number of cases of IE might be prevented by antibiotic

n

Dental Problems of Children with Special Health Care Needs

537

prophylaxis for dental procedures, even if such prophylactic therapy were 100% effective. IE prophylaxis for
­invasive dental procedures involving the manipulation
of gingival tissue or the periapical region of teeth or perforation of the oral mucosa is only for patients with the
­highest risk of adverse outcome (see Box 23-2). Prophylaxis is not recommended.18

DENTAL MANAGEMENT
Parents of patients with cardiac risks typically lack knowledge about IE even after being informed during routine
cardiology visits. Hayes and Fasules19 report a deficiency
of knowledge among dentists regarding the indications
for prophylaxis and the antibiotic regimen required to
prevent IE. Before initiating care, the dentist should obtain a thorough medical and dental history, perform a
physical examination, formulate a complete treatment
plan, and discuss the treatment with the child’s physician
or cardiologist. Behavior management techniques are
useful, and conscious sedation and nitrous oxide–oxygen
analgesia have also been proven beneficial in reducing
anxiety in such patients. Conscious sedation monitoring
and cardiopulmonary resuscitation equipment should be
readily available during the appointment. If general anesthesia is indicated, the dental procedures should be completed in a hospital setting, where adequate supportive
care is available if needed.
Other considerations are especially important in treating patients who are susceptible to IE:
•	Pulp therapy is not recommended for primary teeth
with a poor prognosis because of the high incidence
of associated chronic infection. Extraction of such
teeth with appropriate fixed-space maintenance is
preferred.
•	Endodontic therapy in the permanent dentition can
usually be accomplished successfully if the teeth to
be treated are carefully selected and the endodontic
therapy is adequately performed.
•	A dentist who feels uncomfortable in treating patients
who are susceptible to IE has a responsibility to refer
them to someone who will adequately care for them.

CARDIAC SURGERY PATIENTS
Patients who are to undergo cardiac surgery should first
have a careful dental evaluation so that oral infections
can be properly diagnosed and treated. This practice,
along with an implemented preventive dental program,
will decrease the incidence of postoperative IE from oral
sources, improve surgical outcomes, and improve the patient’s overall health.20
After dental radiographs are obtained and an evaluation is performed, a consultation with the patient’s cardiologist is in order to plan required dental treatment
before surgery. The cardiologist will indicate the specific
desired antibiotic prophylaxis needed before the dental treatment. The dental examination and preventive
dental program should be implemented before the child
reaches 6 months of age when possible. Ideally, dental
treatment should be completed within 3 or 4 weeks of
the planned surgery to allow for healing and the return
of normal flora.

538

Chapter 25

n

Dental Problems of Children with Special Health Care Needs

Box 25-3
Regimens for a Dental Procedure
REGIMEN: SINGLE DOSE 30 TO 60 MINUTES
BEFORE PROCEDURE
SITUATION

AGENT

ADULTS

CHILDREN

Oral

Amoxicillin

2g

50 mg/kg

Unable to take oral medication

Ampicillin
OR
Cefazolin or ceftriaxone

2 g IM or IV
1 g IM or IV

50 mg/kg IM or IV
50 mg/kg IM or IV

Allergic to penicillins or ampicillin—oral

Cephalexin *†
OR
Clindamycin
OR
Azithromycin or clarithromycin

2g
600 mg
500 mg

50 mg/kg
20 mg/kg
15 mg/kg

Allergic to penicillin or ampicillin and
unable to take oral medication

Cefazolin or ceftriaxone†
OR
Clindamycin

1g IM or IV
600 mg IM
or IV

50 mg/kg IM or IV
20 mg/kg IM or IV

IM, intramuscular; IV, intravenous.
*Or other first- or second-generation oral cephalosporin in equivalent adult or pediatric dosage.
†Cephalosporins should not be used in an individual with a history of anaphylaxis, angioedema, or urticaria with penicillins or ampicillin.

REFERENCES
1.	US Department of Health and Human Services: Delivering
on the promise: self-evaluation to promote community living for
people with disabilities: report to the President on Executive Order
13217, Washington, DC, 2002, US Department of Health and
Human Services. Available at www.hhs.gov/newfreedom/
final/hhs.html. Accessed March 19, 2014.
2.	American Academy of Pediatric Dentistry: Guideline on management of dental patients with special health care needs,
Pediatr Dent (Suppl Issue: Ref. Manual, 2013-14) 35:6, 2013.
3.	US Department of Health and Human Services: Oral health in
America: a report of the Surgeon General, Rockville, MD: US Dept
of Health and Human Services, National Institute of Dental and
Craniofacial Research, Bethesda, 2000, National Institutes of
Health.
4.	Kane D, et al.: Factors associated with access to dental care
for children with special health care needs, J Am Dent Assoc
139:326–333, 2008.
5.	Chen AY, Newacheck PW: Insurance coverage and financial burden for families of children with special health care
needs, Ambul Pediatr 6(4):204–209, 2006.
6.	National survey of children with special health care needs:
NS-CSHCN 2009.10. Data query from the Child and Adolescent Health Measurement Initiative, Data Resource
Center for Child and Adolescent Health website. Retrieved
[03/19/2014] from www.childhealthdata.org.
7.	Uniform Federal Accessibility Standards, part II, Fed Reg 153(49):
31528–31613, 1984.
8.	US Department of Health and Human Services: Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA). Available
at: http://aspe.hhs.gov/admnsimp/pl104191.htm. Accessed
Feb. 17, 2009.
9.	Van Cleave J, Davis MM: Preventive care utilization among
children with and without special health care needs: associations with unmet need, Ambul Pediatr 8(5):305–311, 2008.
10.	Moursi AM, et al.: Nutrition and oral health considerations
in children with special health care needs: implication for
oral health care providers, Pediatr Dent 32(4):333–342, 2010.

11.	Beltran-Aguilar E, Goldstein J: Fluoride varnishes: a review
of their clinical use, cariostatic mechanisms, efficacy, and
safety, J Am Dent Assoc 131:589–596, 2000.
12.	
American Academy of Pediatric Dentistry: Behavior guidance for the pediatric dental patient, Pediatr Dent 36, 2014-15
(6 Suppl Issue: Ref. Manual 179–193).
13.	Schalock RL, et al.: The renaming of mental retardation: understanding the change to the term intellectual disability,
Intellect Dev Disabil 45(2):116–124, 2007.
14.	Murakami J, et al.: Cellular mobility of Down syndrome gingival fibroblasts is susceptible to impairment by Porphyromonas gingivalis invasion, J Periodontol 79(4):721–727, 2008.
15.	Bell EJ, et al.: Tooth wear in children with Down syndrome,
Aust Dent J 47:30–35, 2002.
16.	Cheng RH, et al.: Non-surgical periodontal therapy chlorhexidine use in adults with Down syndrome, J Periodontol 79(2):
379–385, 2008.
17.	Nettis E, et al.: Reported latex allergy in dental patients, Oral
Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol Oral Radiol Endod 93(2):144–148,
2002.
18.	Wilson W, et al.: Prevention of infective endocarditis:
guidelines from American Heart Association, Circulation 116:
1736–1754, 2007.
19.	Hayes PA, Fasules J: Dental screening of pediatric cardiac surgical patients, J Dent Child 68:255–258, 2001.
20.	Yasney JS, White J: Dental considerations for cardiac surgery,
J Cardiac Surg 24(1):64–68, 2009.

SUGGESTED READINGS
Abman SH, Mourani PM, Sontag M: Bronchopulmonary dysplasia: a genetic disease, Pediatrics 122(3):658–659, 2008.
Aps JK, Van Maele GO, Martens LC: Oral hygiene habits and oral
health in cystic fibrosis, Eur J Paediatr Dent 3(4):181–187, 2002.
Barnett ML: Dental treatment program for patients with mental
retardation, Ment Retard 26:310, 1988.
Barnett ML, et al.: The prevalence of periodontitis and dental caries in the Down syndrome population, J Periodontol
57:288–293, 1986.

Chapter 25

Behrman RE, et al.: Nelson textbook of pediatrics, ed 18, Philadelphia, 2007, WB Saunders.
Bill D, Weddell JA: Dental office access for the disabled, Spec
Care Dentist 7:246–252, 1987.
Clark CA, et al.: Dental treatment for deaf patients, Spec Care
Dentist 6:102–106, 1986.
Fernald GW, et al.: Cystic fibrosis: a current review, Pediatr Dent
12:72–77, 1990.
Hagerman GW, et al.: Girls with fragile X syndrome: physical
and neurocognitive status and outcome, Pediatrics 89:
395–400, 1992.
Hennequin M, et al.: Accuracy of estimation of dental treatment
need in special care patients, J Dent 28:131–136, 2000.
Hudson M: Dental surgery in pediatric patients with spina
bifida and latex allergy, AORN J 74(1):56–78, 2001.
Itthagarun A, et al.: Fetal alcohol syndrome: case report and
review of the literature, Oral Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol Oral
Radiol Endod 103:e20–e25, 2007.
Jaber MA: Dental caries experience, oral health status and treatment needs of dental patients with autism, J Appl Oral Sci
19(3):212–217, 2011.
Learning Disabilities Foundation of America: http://ldafdn.org.
McCrindle BW, et al.: An evaluation of parental concerns and
misconceptions about heart murmurs, Clin Pediatr 34:25–31,
1995.
Morsey SL: Communicating with and treating the blind child,
Dent Hyg 65:288–290, 1980.
Newschaffer CJ, et al.: The epidemiology of autism spectrum
disorders, Annu Rev Public Health 28:235–258, 2007.
Pope JEC, Curzon MEJ: The dental status of cerebral palsied
children, Pediatr Dent 13(3):156–162, 1991.

n

Dental Problems of Children with Special Health Care Needs

539

Rosenberg DJ, et al.: Estimating treatment and treatment times
for special and nonspecial patients in hospital ambulatory
dental clinics, J Dent Educ 50:665–672, 1986.
Sanders BJ, et al.: Managing patients who have seizure disorders:
dental and medical issues, J Am Dent Assoc 126:1641–1647,
1995.
Sant’Anna LB, Tosello DO: Fetal alcohol syndrome and devel­
oping craniofacial and dental structures: a review, Orthod
Craniofac Res 9:172–185, 2006.
Shelhart WC, et al.: Oral findings in Fragile X syndrome, Am J
Med Genet 23:179–187, 1986.
Simko A, et al.: Fragile X: recognition in young children, Pediatrics 83:547–551, 1989.
Steinbacher DM, Glick M: The dental patient with asthma:
an update and oral health consideration, J Am Dent Assoc
132:1229–1239, 2001.
Stensson M, et al.: Oral health in preschool children with
asthma, Int J Paediatr Dent 18(4):243–250, 2008.
Terzian EC, Schneider RE: Management of the patient with
cystic fibrosis in oral and maxillofacial surgery, J Oral Maxillofac Surg 66(2):349–354, 2008.
Tesini DA, Fenton SJ: Oral health needs of persons with physical
or mental disabilities, Dent Clin North Am 38:483–498, 1994.
Waldman BH, et al.: Children with mental retardation and
epilepsy: demographics and general concerns, J Dent Child
67:274–268, 2000.
Wandera A, Conry JP: Aspiration and ingestion of a foreign
body during dental examination by a patient with spastic
quadriparesis: case report, Pediatr Dent 15:362–363, 1993.
Zhu J, et al.: Dental management of children with asthma, Pediatr Dent 18:363–370, 1996.

CHAPTER

26

Management of the Medically
Compromised Patient:
Hematologic Disorders, Cancer,
Hepatitis, and AIDS
s Brian J. Sanders, Amy D. Shapiro, Randy A. Hock,
John J. Manaloor, and James A. Weddell

For additional resources, please visit the

website.

CHAPTER OUTLINE
HEMOPHILIA
Disorders of Hemostasis
Procoagulant Classification
Treatment
Women with Bleeding Disorders
Complications of Bleeding Disorders
Risks to Dental Staff
Development of a Treatment Plan
Use of Antifibrinolytic Agents
Pain Control

Dental Management
VIRAL HEPATITIS
Sickle Cell Anemia
ACQUIRED IMMUNODEFICIENCY
SYNDROME
Oral Manifestations of HIV Infection
LEUKEMIA
Oral Manifestations of Leukemia
Dental Management of Patients
with Leukemia

T

o achieve optimal oral health for the medically
compromised patient, the dentist and physician
must establish a close working relationship. The
complexity of many of these medical conditions may
require additional treatment time for adequate services
to be provided. To minimize the risk for potential complications that may affect the health of medically compromised patients, the health care team must develop a
proactive aggressive prevention-oriented program. Each
patient presents individual challenges to the dentist;
achieving a successful outcome can be a rewarding experience. This chapter discusses a variety of medical conditions
and their dental management.

HEMOPHILIA
DISORDERS OF HEMOSTASIS
The hemophilias are disorders of hemostasis, resulting
from a deficiency of a clotting factor that promotes formation of a fibrin clot, termed procoagulants. Hemophilia is
an inherited bleeding disorder affecting approximately 1
in 5000 males.1 Hemophilia A, or classic hemophilia, is a
deficiency of factor VIII, also known as antihemophilic factor. It is the most common form of hemophilia and is inherited as an X-linked recessive trait. Therefore males are
affected, females are carriers, and there is no male-to-male
transmission. If a normal male has children with a carrier
540

HEMATOPOIETIC STEM CELL
TRANSPLANTATION
Oral Complications of Bone Marrow
Transplantation
Graft-Versus-Host Disease
Pretransplantation Preparation
Admission and Nursing
Interventions
Remission Phase
SOLID TUMORS

of hemophilia, there is a 50% chance that hemophilia will
occur in each male offspring and a 50% chance that each
female offspring will be a carrier. If a male with hemophilia
has children with a normal female, all male offspring will
be normal, and all female offspring will be carriers. Hemophilia B, or Christmas disease, is caused by a deficiency of
factor IX (plasma thromboplastin component) and is also
inherited as an X-linked recessive trait. Factor IX deficiency
is one fourth as prevalent as factor VIII deficiency.2
Factor XI (plasma thromboplastin antecedent) deficiency, referred to as hemophilia C or Rosenthal’s disease, is inherited as an autosomal-recessive trait, with male and female
offspring equally affected. This disorder is most frequently
observed in those of Ashkenazi Jewish descent, but it is
found in many other populations. Other factor deficiencies,
such as factors II, V, and XIII (one case per 1 million population) and factor VII (one case per 500,000 population), are
rare and are inherited as autosomal-recessive traits.3,4
Von Willebrand disease (VWD) is a hereditary bleeding disorder resulting from an abnormality of the von
Willebrand factor (VWF) found in plasma, platelets,
megakaryocytes, and endothelial cells. VWF circulates in
conjunction with factor VIII, protecting it from proteolytic degradation, and is important in platelet adhesion
to the subendothelium via collagen and therefore the formation of the primary platelet plug. In VWD, VWF may
have a quantitative or qualitative abnormality. VWF is
composed of subunits called multimers. VWD is divided

Chapter 26

n

Management of the Medically Compromised Patient: Hematologic Disorders, Cancer, Hepatitis, and AIDS

541

Following vascular injury:
Endothelial cell

VWF
multimers

FVIII

Platelet

Fibrin clot

VWF binds to subendothelial matrix

Platelets adhere to bound VWF

Fibrin clot formation is catalyzed by platelet surface

Figure 26-1 Primary hemostatic response to vascular injury with evolution into secondary hemostasis. This figure shows the

primary hemostatic response to vascular injury involving the endothelial cell and platelet; primary hemostasis leads to and is
an integral part of secondary hemostasis involving coagulation factors, including von Willebrand factor and factor VIII, culminating in the generation of fibrin. (With permission from CSL Behring and Robert Montgomery.)

into subtypes based on the plasma multimers of VWF, the
amount of VWF present, and ratios between VWF laboratory analyses. Optimal treatment of this disorder is dependent upon the subtype.5-7
Impaired formation of the primary platelet plug results
in bleeding from the skin and mucosa, bruising, epistaxis,
prolonged bleeding after surgical procedures, and menorrhagia (Fig. 26-1). This is in contrast to hemophilia involving deficiencies of factors VIII and IX, where the hallmark
bleeding events include muscles and joints (Fig. 26-2).8

PROCOAGULANT CLASSIFICATION
Factors VIII and IX deficiencies are subcategorized based
on the level of the procoagulant present; normal levels
range from 55% to 100%:
  
•	Severe deficiency: levels less than 1%
•	Moderate deficiency: levels between 1% and 5%
•	Mild deficiency: levels greater than or equal to 5% to
less than 50%
  
Patients with severe deficiency may experience frequent bleeding episodes, often occurring 2 to 4 times
per month. Bleeding episodes are often spontaneous,
without a specific history of injury or trauma. Common sites of bleeding include joints, muscles, and skin.
Hemarthroses (joint hemorrhages) are frequently observed,
with symptoms including pain, stiffness, and limited
range of motion. Repeated episodes of hemarthroses
or muscle hemorrhage result in chronic musculoskeletal disease and culminate in debilitating painful arthritis and disability. Commonly affected joints

include knees, elbows, ankles, hips, and shoulders.2
Pseudotumors (hemorrhagic pseudocysts) may occur in
several locations including the jaw, in which case curettage is indicated.9,10
Patients with moderate deficiency experience less
frequent bleeding episodes occurring approximately 4
to 6 times per year. However, if a target joint (a joint
with repeated episodes of bleeding) develops in a patient with moderate deficiency, spontaneous bleeding
may occur. Patients with mild deficiency bleed infrequently and only in association with surgery or injury.
The diagnosis of a mild deficiency may occur with an
abnormal screening coagulation test performed as part
of a presurgical evaluation, or when bleeding occurs in
association with surgery or trauma. The dental care provider may be the first health care provider to identify
a patient with mild deficiency, since interventions or
injury in the oral cavity may unmask a previously undiagnosed individual.
Mouth lacerations are a common cause of bleeding in children with all severities of hemophilia. Sonis and Musselman evaluated 132 patients with factor
VIII–deficient hemophilia and noted that “persistent
oral bleeding resulted in the diagnosis of 13.6% of all
cases of hemophilia.”11 Approximately 29% of cases of
mild hemophilia observed were discovered as a result
of bleeding from the oral cavity. Of the cases diagnosed
secondary to oral bleeding, 78% were the result of
bleeding from the maxillary frenum and 22% resulted
from tongue bleeds. Thus initial diagnosis of hemophilia,

542

Chapter 26

n

Management of the Medically Compromised Patient: Hematologic Disorders, Cancer, Hepatitis, and AIDS

Tissue factor pathway
Tissue injury
Intrinsic pathway
Tissue factor release

Contact factors
(HMWK, Kalikrein, FXII)
FXI
FXIa

FVII

FIX

FIXa
FVIII

shows the complex interplay between plasma
coagulation factors and fibrinolytic pathway
(plasminogen and end enzyme plasmin) responsible for clot lysis after healing. The importance
of the role of the tissue factor pathway and cellular systems (platelets) in initiating physiologic
hemostasis is highlighted. The factors deficient in
hemophilia A and B (factors VIII and IX, respectively) are shown in relationship to their role
in the coagulation pathway. (Courtesy Anjali
Sharathkumar.)

especially in moderate or mild disease, may directly involve the dentist.12

TREATMENT
The mainstay of therapy for hemophilia is replacement of
the deficient coagulation factor through the use of purified
concentrates either manufactured through recombinant
technology or from pooled plasma. In the past, whole blood,
plasma, or cryoprecipitate was used; but at present, genetically engineered products represent the main source of replacement therapy.13 Factor concentrates are advantageous
as they are generally accessible, easily handled and stored,
and virally inactivated and result in consistent hemostatic
results. The dosage, frequency of administration, and
duration of therapy depend on the activity level required,
half-life of the procoagulant, intervention or procedure
contemplated, or location and severity of the bleeding episode. The half-life of factor VIII is approximately 12 hours,
whereas that for factor IX is approximately 18 hours.2,14
New therapies currently in clinical trials and approaching the marketplace have utilized strategies to prolong the
half-lives of both factor VIII and factor IX. As these products
become clinically available, their individual half-lives will be
used to determine the appropriate dosing interval. In general, factor IX–modified long-lasting products have achieved
an increase in factor IX half-life of 3 to 5 times the native
protein, whereas factor VIII–modified long-lasting products
are within 1.5 times the native protein due to factor VII’s
association with and limitation of VWF half-life in plasma.15

Hemophilia A
Factor VIII concentrate is used to treat hemophilia A.
Vials of factor concentrate are labeled with the number

FVIIa/TF

FVa

FVIIIa

Ca
FX

Figure 26-2 Coagulation cascade. This figure

FXa
Phospholipids
Prothrombin

Thrombin

Fibrinogen
t-PA
Plasminogen

Platelet
activation

Plasmin

Fibrin

FXIII
Cross-linked fibrin
Fibrin polymer

of international activity units contained, where 1 IU is
the amount of activity of the procoagulant present in
1 mL of normal plasma. For routine hemorrhagic episodes, such as early joint, soft-tissue, and oral bleeds,
an initial correction to an approximate level of 40% to
50% commonly achieves hemostasis and resolution of
the bleeding episode. However, some care providers use
higher doses for initial treatment and follow-up doses,
especially in hemarthroses.16 For mild factor VIII deficiency, DDAVP (1-deamino-8-d-arginine vasopressin)
(Sanofi-Aventis, Bridgewater, New Jersey, United States)
may be used for minor hemorrhagic episodes to achieve
hemostasis. DDAVP (desmopressin acetate) is a synthetic analogue of the natural pituitary hormone 8-arginine
vasopressin (antidiuretic hormone) that affects renal
water conservation. This drug, when given intravenously, subcutaneously, or intranasally (Stimate), causes a
rise in activities of factor VIII and VWF through release
from stored sites in endothelial cells. An appropriate
rise in factor VIII activity to hemostatic levels should
be documented for any given patient before therapeutic use of this agent as responses vary among individuals. Peak levels are obtained approximately 1 hour after
intravenous or subcutaneous administration and 90
minutes after intranasal administration. The intranasal
form used to treat bleeding disorders is a more concentrated form of DDAVP than the preparation used to treat
diabetes insipidus or enuresis. Therefore the concentrated preparation should be written for a brand name
only or in conjunction with the stated concentration
of 1.5 mg/mL of DDAVP. Repeated administration of
DDAVP may result in tachyphylaxis, a reduction in expected response with sequential dosing due to depletion

Chapter 26

n

Management of the Medically Compromised Patient: Hematologic Disorders, Cancer, Hepatitis, and AIDS

of storage sites. Use of DDAVP to treat hemorrhagic
disorders may also be associated with water retention,
hyponatremia, and, rarely, seizures; therefore monitoring of electrolytes may be required in some circumstances, especially in surgical situations.17-19

Hemophilia B
Factor IX deficiency is treated with purified coagulation factor IX concentrate (monoclonal and recombinant). In the past, less pure products in the class of
prothrombin complex concentrates (PCCs) were used.
PCCs contained other vitamin K–dependent coagulation factors in addition to factor IX and some activated
forms of these procoagulants. Individuals who require
high doses or repeated PCC infusions are at risk for development of disseminated intravascular coagulation
and thrombosis. The minimal desired level for hemostasis is the same for factor IX as for factor VIII (∼40%);
however, the number of units required to achieve this
level is different as the volume of distribution of factor
IX (minimally ∼1.0) is greater than that for factor VIII
(0.5). The volume of distribution of recombinant factor IX is greater than that of plasma-derived factor IX
(estimated minimum volume of 1.2 compared with 1,
respectively, whereas in infants and young children a
minimum volume of distribution of 1.4 should be used
for dose calculation). Because interindividual variability
in the volume of distribution is wide, measurement of
activity levels may be required to document a hemostatic level.2,13,20

Treatment Regimens
Clotting factor concentrates are administered in different
regimens depending on the patient’s level of severity,
number of bleeding episodes, and physician’s recommendations. Treatment regimens may be divided into
replacement therapy administered after a bleeding episode has occurred (on-demand therapy) or as therapy
administered on a regularly scheduled basis to prevent
or suppress bleeding episodes (prophylaxis). Prophylactic regimens are further subdivided into primary and
secondary. Primary prophylaxis is a long-term treatment for prevention of joint disease instituted before
or after minimal hemarthrosis has occurred; secondary
prophylaxis may be long or short term, but is instituted
after hemarthrosis has occurred or to interrupt a bleeding pattern to rest a joint. Primary prophylactic therapy
has been shown in a prospective randomized study to
be the most effective regimen to prevent joint disease
in patients with severe hemophilia and is now considered the standard of care for these patients.21 Therefore
dental care providers should schedule dental evaluations and interventions on regularly planned infusion
days, whereas patients treated with on-demand regimens
require discussion regarding the need for replacement
therapy to be administered, specifically for dental interventions. Patients using regimens of prophylaxis may
have a central venous catheter placed for frequent venous
access. The use of antibiotic prophylaxis to protect the
central venous access device may be considered, although
it is not recommended by the Centers for Disease Control

543

and Prevention (see Antibiotic Prophylaxis in the section
on Dental Management).22

Von Willebrand Disease
Patients with VWD should undergo subtyping to determine optimal therapy. DDAVP may be used to achieve hemostasis in most patients with type I VWD, where type I
VWD represents a quantitative VWF deficiency with intact
multimers. When DDAVP is used, a test dose should be administered to document an adequate hemostatic response.
For patients with less common subtypes of VWD, patients
who do not respond to DDAVP, or patients for whom
DDAVP is contraindicated, or in bleeding events where
DDAVP is contraindicated, other therapeutic modalities
may be required, including replacement with exogenous
intact VWF through the use of a concentrate. Interventions and therapeutic approaches should be discussed with
a hemophilia-comprehensive treatment center.6,7,23,24

WOMEN WITH BLEEDING DISORDERS
Female carriers of hemophilia A and B may have decreased levels of factors VIII and IX, respectively, with levels in the mild deficiency range. It is recommended that,
to determine bleeding risk, all carriers of hemophilia be
evaluated to determine their baseline factor activity level
specific to the type of hemophilia carried. Women who
are carriers of hemophilia should be treated as potential
mild-deficient patients, and their hematologist should be
contacted to determine the baseline factor activity level
and need for treatment before or after specific dental
­interventions.25,26
As previously discussed, VWD is inherited as an autosomal-dominant trait, with males and females equally affected. In addition, very rare bleeding disorders such as
factors VII, IX, XIII etc. are autosomal-recessive, with females and males equally affected. Therefore females with
bleeding disorders are not uncommon. An appropriate
personal and family history is required to determine if individuals are or could be affected.23

COMPLICATIONS OF BLEEDING DISORDERS
Inhibitors are antibodies, commonly IgG, that are directed against and neutralize the replaced coagulation factor.
Inhibitors are one of the most severe complications for
patients with hemophilia. Inhibitors may develop in approximately 30% of patients with severe factor VIII deficiency and in 3% to 5% of patients with severe factor IX
deficiency.27 The key to successful treatment of patients
with inhibitors is accurate knowledge of the inhibitor
classification (high- vs. low-responding) and current inhibitor level. Patients with inhibitors are divided into two
general groups, high and low responders, based on the
past peak anamnestic titer. Inhibitor levels are measured
in Bethesda units (BU), a measurement that reflects the
ability of the antibody to neutralize a specific amount of
procoagulant.27,28 Low responders have peak levels at any
time less than 5 BU and may continue to be treated with
factor concentrate at higher than normal doses, whereas
high responders have peak titers greater than or equal
to 5 BU and require use of bypassing products (activated
PCC or recombinant factor VIIa). Hemophilic patients

544

Chapter 26

n

Management of the Medically Compromised Patient: Hematologic Disorders, Cancer, Hepatitis, and AIDS

with inhibitors pose considerable treatment challenges
and should be managed only in conjunction with a hemophilia-comprehensive treatment center, as hemostasis
is often difficult to achieve or maintain and patient response to therapy is variable.
Another important complication of hemophilia includes
arthritis—a degenerative joint disease—and resultant
disability secondary to recurrent bleeding.29 Blood-borne
viral infections have previously represented an important
treatment complication of these disorders and may have
been transmitted via required blood or blood-derived
concentrates prior to effective viral inactivation methods.
Hepatitis B and C have been a significant source of morbidity and mortality in this patient population.30 The human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) has also been a major
source of morbidity and mortality since approximately
1979. Before 1985 there was no antibody test for HIV and
no consistent effective viral inactivation in the manufacture of plasma-derived factor concentrates. Therefore
between 1979 and 1985, factor concentrates and blood
products may have been contaminated with HIV. Approximately 90% of hemophilic patients with severe factor
VIII deficiency, and 30% of those with severe factor IX
deficiency who received plasma concentrates during the
at-risk period may have become infected with HIV. HIV
infection is a sensitive issue for these individuals, who
may now bear the burden of two chronic conditions.31
Currently available treatments of factor concentrates
made through recombinant technology or pooled plasma
have effectively eliminated transmission of HIV and hepatitis B and C. Nevertheless, universal precautions should
be followed in the treatment of all hemophilic patients
with a history of receiving factor concentrates.

RISKS TO DENTAL STAFF
Virtually all surgical trainees will experience at least one
needle-stick injury, and nurses are at significant risk for
multiple needle-stick injuries, given their frequent handling of sharps. The risk for acquiring hepatitis B (HBV),
hepatitis C (HCV), or human immunodeficiency (HIV)
virus infections following an accidental needle stick are
30%, 3%, and 0.3%, respectively.32 Although there is
now evidence for the transmission of HIV when infected
mothers premasticate food for their children, the quantifiable risk of HIV transmission via saliva alone is lower
than that from a needle-stick injury.33,34
A study by Klein and colleagues demonstrated a quantifiable occupational risk for HCV infection among dental professionals, with higher rates among oral surgeons
when compared with rates among conventional dentists.35 Investigators at a dental teaching hospital report
that exposures occur while sharps are cleared away after
direct patient care.36,32 These data warrant that dental
personnel be vaccinated against HBV and adopt appropriate universal precautions during and after all patient
encounters, especially since many patients do not know
their status relative to these blood-borne infections.

DEVELOPMENT OF A TREATMENT PLAN
With recent advances in treatment, most patients with
bleeding disorders receive outpatient dental care routinely.

With a thorough understanding of the patient’s hemostatic disorder, the dentist, in conjunction with the hematologist, is able to make safe and appropriate treatment
decisions.
The dentist must be aware of the procedures that can
be safely performed and those in which complications
may arise. The dentist should confer with the patient’s
physician and hematologist to formulate an appropriate
treatment plan. The dentist should know the specific type
of bleeding disorder, severity, frequency of and treatment
for bleeding episodes, as well as the patient’s inhibitor
status. Many individuals with hemophilia self-administer
infusion products at home and are therefore able to treat
themselves as required. The dentist should be prepared
to discuss with the hematologist the type of anesthetic
anticipated to be administered, invasiveness of the dental procedure, amount of bleeding anticipated, and time
involved in oral wound-healing in order to help establish
an appropriate treatment plan, including the need for replacement and adjunctive therapies.37

USE OF ANTIFIBRINOLYTIC AGENTS
Antifibrinolytic agents are an adjunctive therapy for
dental management of patients with bleeding disorders
and are important for the prevention or treatment of
oral bleeding. These agents include ε-aminocaproic acid
(Amicar; Xanodyne Pharmaceuticals, Florence, Kentucky,
United States) and tranexamic acid (Lysteda; Ferring Pharmaceuticals, Parsippany, New Jersey, United States and
Cyklokapron; Pfizer, New York, New York, United States).
Hemophilic patients form loose, friable clots that are easily dislodged or rapidly dissolved, especially in the oral
cavity, where local fibrinolysis is increased. Antifibrinolytics prevent clot lysis within the oral cavity and are often
used as an adjunctive therapy to factor concentrates. For
some dental procedures in which minimal bleeding is anticipated, antifibrinolytics may be recommended as the
sole hemostatic agent.

Dosages

In children ε-aminocaproic acid is given immediately
before dental treatment in an initial loading dose of 100
to 200 mg/kg by mouth up to a maximum total dose of
10 g. Subsequently, 50 to 100 mg/kg per dose up to a
total maximum dose of 5 g is administered orally every
6 hours for 5 to 7 days. Alternatively, for patients of approximately adult size or heavier than 30 kg, a regimen
of 3 g by mouth 4 times daily without a loading dose
may be used. The advantage of ε-aminocaproic acid for
children is that it is available in both tablet and liquid
form.
The maximum oral dose of tranexamic acid is 25 mg/
kg; for a 60 kg adult, the dose is 1500 mg every 8 hours.
Doses of 10 to 15 mg/kg/kg body weight have been reported to be effective depending on the location and severity of bleeding. Dosing is continued every 8 hours for
5 to 7 days. In the United States, the oral preparation of
tranexamic acid is available and approved only for use
in cyclic menorrhagia; however, physicians have utilized
this agent off-label for bleeding in other areas, including
dental procedures or oral bleeding. In addition, the

Chapter 26

n

Management of the Medically Compromised Patient: Hematologic Disorders, Cancer, Hepatitis, and AIDS

intravenous formulation is available in the United States
and may be administered orally if required.37,38

Side effects
The common side effects associated with the use of antifibrinolytics include headache, nausea, and dry mouth.
These side effects are usually tolerable and, unless severe,
do not require discontinuation of the medication. Other
less common side effects have been reported. To avoid
thrombosis, antifibrinolytics should not be used when renal or urinary tract bleeding is present or when there is
evidence of disseminated intravascular coagulation. Repeated use of a PCC in patients with inhibitors should also
be avoided during a course of antifibrinolytic therapy as
this combination may predispose to thrombotic episodes.

PAIN CONTROL
Analgesia
If patient apprehension is significant, sedation or nitrous
oxide–oxygen inhalation analgesia may be considered.
Hypnosis has also proved beneficial for some individuals.
Intramuscular injections of hypnotic, tranquilizing, or
analgesic agents are contraindicated especially in patients
who have not received replacement therapy or in patients
with inhibitors, due to the risk of hematoma formation.
Analgesics containing aspirin or anti-inflammatory agents
(e.g., ibuprofen) may affect platelet function and should
be avoided. Acute pain of moderate intensity is frequently managed with acetaminophen (Tylenol; McNeil Pharmaceuticals, Washington, Pennsylvania, United States).
Darvon Compound-65 contains aspirin and should be
avoided. For severe pain, narcotic analgesics may be required and are not contraindicated in the patient with a
bleeding disorder.

Local Anesthesia
In the absence of factor replacement, periodontal ligament (PDL) injections may be used. The anesthetic is administered along the four axial surfaces of the tooth by
placement of the needle into the gingival sulcus and the
PDL space. Infiltration anesthesia can generally be administered without pretreatment with either ε-aminocaproic
acid or replacement therapy. However, if the infiltration
injection is into loose connective tissue or a highly vascularized area, then factor concentrate replacement to
achieve a level of approximately 30% to 40% activity is
required.
One must proceed with caution when considering
block anesthesia. The loose, connective, nonfibrous,
and highly vascularized tissue at the sites of inferior
alveolar nerve injection and posterior superior alveolar
injections is predisposed to development of a dissecting
hematoma, which may cause airway obstruction and result in a life-threatening bleeding episode. Therefore a
minimum of a 40% factor correction is mandatory with
block anesthesia. The dentist must carefully aspirate to
ensure that the needle has not entered a blood vessel.
If bloody aspirate is present, further factor replacement
may be required, and the attending hematologist should
be notified immediately following the operative procedure. All patients should be observed for development of

545

a hematoma and immediately referred for treatment in
cases where hematomas develop after the administration
of local anesthesia.

DENTAL MANAGEMENT
Most patients with bleeding disorders are recommended
to receive routine regular outpatient dental care. Appointments should be arranged so that maximum treatment
is accomplished per visit in order to minimize the need
for unscheduled factor infusions and resultant increased
cost.37-39 Patients with inhibitors are best treated at a center with experience in dealing with this complication.
Dental procedures utilized to treat a patient with a bleeding disorder do not differ significantly from those used for
unaffected individuals.

Prevention of Dental Disease
A program that includes toothbrushing, flossing, appropriate topical fluoride exposure, adequate systemic fluoride administration, consumption of a proper diet, and
professional examination at regular intervals is an effective approach to the prevention of dental problems.
Rubber cup prophylaxis and supragingival scaling may
be safely performed without prior factor replacement
therapy. Minor bleeding is often controlled with local
measures, such as direct pressure with a moistened gauze
square. If bleeding persists for several minutes, the topical application of recombinant thrombin (RECOTHROM;
ZymoGenetics, Inc., Seattle, Washington, United States),*
microfibrillar collagen (Avitene; Darvol Inc., subsidiary
of C.R. Bard, Inc., Warwick, Rhode Island, United States),
and local fibrin glue may be of value.

Periodontal Therapy
Patients who require deep scaling due to gross calculus
should initially undergo supragingival scaling. The tissue
should be allowed to heal for 7 to 14 days, during which
time the gingiva recedes as edema and hyperemia diminish.
Subsequent treatments to remove calculus and irritants
therefore incur decreased bleeding risk from the tissue. If
subgingival scaling is planned, replacement therapy may
be considered, depending on the amount of anticipated
bleeding and the severity of the factor deficiency. It is
imperative that periodontal patients be placed on a maintenance schedule for proper management.37,40,41
An abnormal frenum attachment may cause gingival
recession and pocket formation. Early treatment is indicated to prevent continued gingival recession and alveolar bone loss. All appropriate frenectomy techniques are
surgically acceptable for patients with bleeding disorders;
both factor concentrate replacement and antifibrinolytic
therapy are required before frenum or other periodontal
surgery. If a large amount of bleeding is anticipated, these
procedures should be performed in a hospital environment, with the requisite preparation. The hematologist or
attending physician must be contacted to determine the
*Although not reported in the dental literature, bovine
­thrombin–induced acquired factor V deficiency—a rare, acquired
coagulopathy—has been reported; therefore recombinant thrombin is recommended.

546

Chapter 26

n

Management of the Medically Compromised Patient: Hematologic Disorders, Cancer, Hepatitis, and AIDS

appropriate factor correction required and the possible
need for subsequent hospital or outpatient management.

Restorative Procedures
Patients with bleeding disorders should be allowed to
consider all restorative procedures. Most restorative procedures on primary teeth are successfully completed,
without factor concentrate replacement, by PDL injections of local anesthesia or local infiltration. Small lesions
may be restored under nitrous oxide–oxygen inhalation
analgesia alone. The use of acetaminophen with codeine
may also decrease discomfort in the child.
Most operative procedures for adults may also be completed under local anesthesia, a procedure that usually
does not require factor concentrate replacement. If a mandibular block or a posterior superior alveolar injection is
anticipated, factor concentrate replacement to a level
of 40% and antifibrinolytic therapy are required before
injection. If factor concentrate replacement is required,
all possible restorative treatment should be completed in
one visit to minimize the number of infusions required to
complete the restorative treatment plan.
A rubber dam should be used to isolate the operating
field and retract and protect the cheeks, lips, and tongue.
These soft tissues are highly vascular, and accidental laceration may present a difficult management problem. A
thin rubber dam is preferred, since there is a decreased
tendency to torque the rubber dam retainer and cause
gingival tissue abrasion. The retainer should be placed
carefully so that it is stable. If a retainer slips, it may lacerate the gingival papilla. Retainers with subgingival extensions should be avoided.
Wedges and matrices can be used conventionally. During proximal preparation, the wedge retracts the papilla,
thus protecting it. A properly placed matrix should not
cause bleeding.
High-speed vacuum and saliva ejectors must be used
with caution to prevent sublingual hematomas. Care
must also be used in the placement of intraoral radiographic films, particularly in highly vascular sublingual
tissues.
The preparation of a tooth for a cast crown requires
caution in gingival preparation, as does placement of retraction cord and impression material. Periphery wax is
used on the impression tray to prevent possible intraoral
laceration during tray placement. Undue trauma should
be avoided in cementing or finishing a crown.

Pulpal Therapy
At times pulp exposures in primary and permanent teeth
may be avoided if carious dentin is not entirely removed
in one procedure (indirect pulp therapy). A pulpotomy or
pulpectomy is preferable to extraction. The extraction of
a tooth in an individual with a bleeding disorder involves
more complicated treatment and expense. Most vital
pulpotomy and pulpectomy procedures can be successfully completed with local infiltration anesthesia. Nitrous
oxide–oxygen inhalation analgesia may also help alleviate discomfort. If the pulp of a vital tooth is exposed, an
intrapulpal injection may be used safely to control pain.
Bleeding from the pulp chamber does not present a

significant problem, in that it is readily controlled with
pressure from cotton pledgets. If pulp tissue is necrotic,
local anesthetic is usually unnecessary.

Oral Surgery
Preoperative evaluation and postoperative management
of the patient with a bleeding disorder and undergoing
extractions must be coordinated with the hematologist.
The dentist should discuss the surgical procedure with the
hematologist, including the anesthetic technique, degree
of anticipated surgical trauma, and expected duration for
healing. The hematologist then determines the amount and
duration of factor concentrate replacement and adjunctive
therapies required for surgery and postoperative management. Today it is possible for oral surgery to be performed
in the patient with a bleeding disorder on an outpatient
basis.42,43 Requirements include an experienced dentist and
hematologist, a facility available for the patient to receive
infusions if home infusion is not performed, and a coagulation laboratory capable of timely needed laboratory evaluations. Patients with inhibitors should be treated only in a
safe setting by those experienced in their management.
For simple extractions of erupted permanent teeth and
multirooted primary teeth, a 30% to 40% factor correction
is administered within 1 hour before dental treatment.
Antifibrinolytic therapy should be started immediately
before or after the procedure and should be continued for
5 to 10 days. The patient should be placed on a clear liquid
diet for the first 72 hours. For the next week, a soft, pureed diet is recommended. During this period, the patient
should not use straws, metal utensils, pacifiers, or bottles.
After 10 days the patient may begin to consume a more
normal diet. Specific postoperative instructions should be
provided to the patient and parent. Factor concentrate
is extremely costly; therefore all extractions should be
completed in one appointment if possible.
After extractions are completed, direct topical application of hemostatic agents, such as thrombin or microfibrillar collagen hemostat (Avitene; Darvol Inc.), may assist
with local hemostasis. The socket should be packed with
an absorbable gelatin sponge (e.g., Gelfoam; Pharmacia
and Upjohn Co., Kalamazoo, Michigan, United States).
Microfibrillar collagen or topical thrombin or fibrin glue
may then be placed in the wound. Direct pressure with
gauze should then be applied to the area.
Stomahesive (ConvaTec Inc., Skillman, New Jersey,
United States) may be placed over the wound for additional protection from the oral environment. In general,
the use of sutures should be avoided unless suturing is
expected to markedly enhance healing, in which case resorbent sutures are recommended. The patient must be
given specific and thorough postoperative instructions.
For surgical extractions of impacted, partially erupted,
or unerupted teeth, a higher factor activity level may be
targeted before surgery due to the increased likelihood of
surgical trauma and a longer healing period. This should
be discussed with the hematologist, who may also elect
to administer factor replacement to the patient postoperatively. Antifibrinolytic therapy should be started immediately before or after the procedure and continue for
7 to 10 days.

Chapter 26

n

Management of the Medically Compromised Patient: Hematologic Disorders, Cancer, Hepatitis, and AIDS

For simple extractions of single-rooted primary teeth
(i.e., incisors and canines), the amount of root development present must be evaluated to determine whether
factor replacement therapy is required. If there is complete root development, factor replacement therapy is
likely required, whereas if there is only partial root formation, antifibrinolytic therapy along with local hemostatic
agents may be all that is required.
The normal exfoliation of primary teeth does not
usually result in bleeding or require factor replacement.
Bleeding in these circumstances can generally be controlled with direct finger and gauze pressure maintained
for several minutes. The direct topical application of an
adjunctive agent may also help with local hemostasis. If
there is continuous slow bleeding, antifibrinolytic therapy
may be initiated. In rare circumstances, most commonly
when the gingival tissue is repeatedly traumatized during exfoliation, use of factor replacement therapy may be
required. In this circumstance, dental evaluation should
be performed and consideration given to removal of the
exfoliating tooth if repeated trauma cannot be avoided.

Surgical Complications
Despite all precautions, bleeding may occur 3 to 4 days
postoperatively when the clot begins to resorb. Both
systemic and local treatment should be used for hemostatic control when bleeding occurs. Sufficient replacement factor should be administered to control recurrent
bleeding.44
It is not prudent to protect a loose abnormal clot. The
typical clot in this situation is characterized as a “liver
clot” and is dark red, usually protruding from the surgical site, and often covers the surfaces of several teeth.
Following adequate replacement with factor concentrate, usually to a 30% to 40% activity level, the abnormal clot should be removed and the area cleansed to
help isolate the source of bleeding. The socket should
then be repacked, and the use of antifibrinolytic agents
considered.

Antibiotic Prophylaxis
Total joint replacement, usually of the hip or knee, is often performed in adult patients with severe hemophilia
to restore function and alleviate pain associated with degenerative arthritis due to recurrent hemarthroses.The
American Dental Association and American Academy
of Orthopedic Surgeons advocate in favor of antibiotic prophylaxis for patients with artificial joints before
invasive dental procedures. Although there is limited
evidence to support this recommendation,45,46 the dentist should consult with the orthopedic surgeon prior
to dental treatment. The American Heart Association
recommendations for bacterial endocarditis prophylaxis, last updated in 2007, are commonly followed.47
Antibiotic prophylaxis is no longer recommended for
patients with central venous access devices, although
each hematologist’s preference and particular patient’s
circumstance should be considered. If the patient is immunocompromised because of HIV infection, antibiotic
prophylaxis may be considered in coordination with the
HIV specialist.

547

Orthodontic Treatment
Early recognition of an orthodontic problem is important because selective guidance can diminish or eliminate
complex orthodontic problems. Both interceptive and
full-banded orthodontics may be performed if required.
Care must be taken in the adaptation and placement of
bands and in the avoidance of protruding sharp edges
and wires to prevent laceration of oral mucosa. Bleeding caused by an accidental scratch or minor laceration
of the gingiva usually responds to applied pressure for 5
minutes. The use of preformed orthodontic bands and
brackets, which can be bonded directly to the teeth, almost totally eliminates contact of orthodontic appliances
with gingiva during placement. Longer-acting wires and
springs require less frequent adjustment of orthodontic appliances. Oral hygiene is particularly important to
avoid inflamed, edematous, and hemorrhagic gingival tissues. A water-irrigating device may be helpful for home
dental care.

Dental Emergencies
Oral trauma is a common occurrence during childhood.
Management of bleeding injuries, including hematomas,
in the oral cavity of the patient with a bleeding disorder may require a combination of factor replacement and
antifibrinolytic therapy, as well as treatment with local
hemostatic agents. Blood loss from the oral cavity is easily underestimated or overestimated. The patient’s hemoglobin should be checked to ensure that anemia has not
developed in these circumstances.

VIRAL HEPATITIS
Infection by the various strains of viral hepatitis causes
inflammation of the liver parenchyma, which may lead
to necrosis or cirrhosis. Acute hepatitis classically presents
with lethargy, loss of appetite, nausea, vomiting, and abdominal pain, but may not be recognized until jaundice
ultimately develops.
Acute viral hepatitis may be caused by any of the following: hepatitis A virus (HAV), HBV, hepatitis delta virus
(HDV), HCV, or hepatitis E virus (HEV).
HAV infection results in an acute febrile illness with
jaundice, anorexia, nausea, and malaise. Most HAV infections in infants and children cause mild, nonspecific symptoms without jaundice. HAV is spread by the fecal-oral route
and is endemic in developing areas. Spread occurs readily
in households and day-care centers, where symptomatic illness occurs primarily among adult contacts with children.
No HAV carrier state exists, and the presence of immunoglobulin G–anti-HAV indicates past infection and lifelong
immunity to HAV. The risk for transmission in a dental
setting is low. A two-dose vaccination series separated by
6 months can be given to anyone older than 1 year of age.
HBV transmission is of major concern to the dentist.
Members of the dental profession assume a risk for acquiring HBV that may be 10 times greater than that of the
general population.48 An additional concern is the potential of becoming an asymptomatic yet infectious carrier
of HBV and of having the capability of transmitting the
disease to patients and dental staff members and family.

548

Chapter 26

n

Management of the Medically Compromised Patient: Hematologic Disorders, Cancer, Hepatitis, and AIDS

HBV is transmitted from person to person by parenteral, percutaneous, or mucous membrane inoculation.
It can be transmitted by the percutaneous introduction
of blood, administration of certain blood products, or
direct contact with secretions contaminated with blood
containing HBV. Infection may also result from inoculation of mucous membranes, including sexual transmission. Wound exudates contain HBV, and open-wound to
open-wound contact can transmit infection. There can
also be vertical transmission from an infected mother to
her baby, which frequently leads to chronic infection.
A medical history is unreliable in identifying patients
who have HBV infection, because approximately 80% of
all HBV infections are undiagnosed. However, the medical history is useful in identifying groups of patients who
are at higher risk of being undiagnosed carriers. Among
populations at high risk for HBV infection are patients
undergoing hemodialysis, patients requiring frequent
large-volume blood transfusions or administration of
clotting factor concentrates, residents of institutions for
those with mental disabilities, and users of illicit injectable drugs.
In 2011 an estimated 18,000 people in the United
States became infected with HBV, and an estimated
700,000 to 1.4 million chronically infected people live
in the United States. Overall, chronic hepatitis B claims
nearly 1800 lives per year in the United States.49 Chronic
active hepatitis develops in more than 25% of carriers and
often progresses to cirrhosis. Furthermore, HBV carriers
have a 12 to 300 times higher risk of developing primary
liver cancer than uninfected individuals.
For detection of acute or chronic HBV infection, the
serologic test for hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg) is
most commonly used. The antibody to surface antigen
(anti-HBs) is protective and indicates a resolved natural
infection or successful vaccination. Antibody to the core
antigen (anti-HBc) indicates exposure to natural HBV but
can be present in either resolved or chronic infection. The
hepatitis B “e” antigen (HBeAg) is a useful marker for infectivity. Patients who test positive for anti-HBe and HBsAg are most likely to transmit the disease. If the patient
still shows a positive test result for HBsAg 6 months after
an acute HBV infection, the patient is considered to be
chronically infected. Chronic infection is less likely the
older the patient at the time of exposure; hence the mandate to vaccinate children shortly after birth.
The availability of a safe, effective hepatitis B vaccine
affords the dentist and staff additional protection against
acquiring HBV infection. HBV vaccine is recommended
for all health care personnel. The vaccine is derived using recombinant DNA and therefore does not have the
potential to transmit the disease. When administered in a
three-dose injection regimen (0, 1, 6 months), the recombinant DNA vaccine induces protective antibody (antiHBs) in 95% to 100% of adults.
A fulminant type of hepatitis occurs with infection
by HDV but only with coexisting or simultaneous infection with HBV. HDV is defective in that it requires HBV
for outer coat proteins (HBsAg), as well as for replication.
Transmission is similar to that of HBV—by parenteral,
percutaneous, or mucous membrane inoculation.

HCV, against which there is no available immunization, is of similar concern for the dentist because of its
transmission via exposure to infectious body fluids. Patients at risk for hepatitis C include those who received
blood transfusions or organ transplants before 1992,
those who received clotting factors before 1987, those on
long-term dialysis, and most commonly those who have
experimented with illicit intravenous drugs, regardless of
how many times or how long ago. Infection associated
with injection drug use accounts for more than 50% of
the new cases in the United States. Of those infected,
chronic infection develops in 70% to 85%, and chronic
liver disease develops in about 70%. Although only 3%
of infected people die of liver failure, hepatitis C is the
leading reason for liver transplantation in adults in the
United States.50
In 1989 parenterally transmitted non-A non-B (NANB)
was identified as HCV. Subsequently, six genotypes have
been identified. Diagnosis is made by detection of antibody
to HCV (anti-HCV) in the serum and can be confirmed
by radioimmunoblot assay. Polymerase chain reaction
(PCR) testing can be done qualitatively to confirm diagnosis or quantitatively to assess response to treatment.
Treatment historically included administration of interferon or pegy­lated interferon with or without ribavirin,
with response rates varying based on the viral genotype.
Newer agents such as simeprevir, a NS3/4A protease
inhibitor, and sofosbuvir, a nucleotide analogue NS5B
polymerase inhibitor, have been shown to be effective
agents in combination, and are transforming care for patients with HCV, especially for those not eligible for interferon.51 In 2011 the Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention esti­mated that there were 16,500 new cases
of infection with hepatitis C in the United States, down
from 240,000 per year in the 1980s.52 There are nearly
4 million people infected with hepatitis C in the United
States (1.6%). Of the chronically infected, some 16,000
patients die per year. Enterically transmitted NANB has
been identified as the hepatitis E virus. Transmission
is by the fecal-oral route. Large, well-documented outbreaks have been seen worldwide and can be found in
the returning traveler.53 There appear to be a 6- to 8-week
incubation period and a low incidence of carrier state
after infection. However, a high fatality rate (10% to
20%) is seen in women who contract this virus in their
third trimester of pregnancy.54 There is no immunization
available against this pathogen.

SICKLE CELL ANEMIA
Sickle cell anemia (SCA) is composed of sickle cell trait,
which is benign and does not restrict medical or dental
treatment, and sickle cell disease (SCD). Patients with
SCD have an autosomal-recessive hemolytic disorder that
occurs predominantly in persons of African descent but
is also found among Italian, Arabian, Greek, and Indian
people.55
Patients with SCD produce hemoglobin S instead of
the normal hemoglobin A. Hemoglobin S has a decreased
oxygen-carrying capacity. Decreased oxygen tension
causes sickling of cells. These patients are susceptible to
recurrent acute infections, which result in an “aplastic

Chapter 26

n

Management of the Medically Compromised Patient: Hematologic Disorders, Cancer, Hepatitis, and AIDS

crisis” caused by decreased red blood cell production and
in subsequent joint and abdominal pain with fever. Over
time, there is a progressive deterioration of cardiac, pulmonary, and renal function.
Many factors can precipitate a sickle cell crisis, including acidosis, hypoxia, hypothermia, hypotension, stress,
hypovolemia, dehydration, fever, and infection. Patients
with SCD have hemoglobin levels of 6 to 9 g/dL (normal,
12 to 18 g/dL). Patients with SCD are treated with hydroxyurea (HU) in an attempt to increase their fetal hemoglobin and prevent the formation of the HbS polymer.
Hematopoietic stem cell transplantation is the only available curative therapy.55
Radiographic changes are associated with SCD, in particular, a generalized radiolucency and loss of trabeculae
with prominent lamina dura, caused by increased erythropoietic demands that result in expansion of the marrow
spaces. Bone growth may be decreased in the mandible,
resulting in retrusion, and the teeth may be hypomineralized. There is a high incidence of malocclusions in patients
with SCD. There is an increased incidence of overjet, higher
angulation, and diastames secondary to the compensating
expansion of their bone marrow.56 Occasionally, patients
with SCD have infarcts in the jaw, which may be mistaken
for a toothache or osteomyelitis. The patients experience
dental pain with absence of pathology.
Dental appointments should be short to reduce potential stress on the patient. The importance of an aggressive
preventive program cannot be understated, and such a
program should have the goal of maintaining excellent
oral health and decreasing the possibility of oral infection. Dental treatment should not be initiated during a
sickle cell crisis. If emergency treatment is necessary during a crisis, only treatment that will make the patient
more comfortable should be provided. Patients with SCD
may have skeletal changes that make orthodontic treatment beneficial. Special care must be taken to avoid tissue
irritation, which may induce bacteremias, and the disease
process may compromise the proposed treatment. Careful
monitoring is a necessity when elective orthodontic treatment is proposed for patients with SCD.
Many patients with SCD have defective spleen function or undergo a splenectomy, which leaves them more
vulnerable to infection because immunoglobulin production is decreased and phagocytosis of foreign antigens is
thus impaired. Most patients with SCD are taking lowdose daily prophylactic antibiotics, and the need for additional antibiotics for dental procedures is debatable.
Some authors have recommended the use of antibiotics
for all dental procedures, whereas others recommend the
administration of additional antibiotics when there is obvious dental or periodontal infection. The selection of an
antibiotic is usually similar to that in cases of heart defect.
The use of local anesthetics with a vasoconstrictor is
not contraindicated in patients with SCD. Some textbooks do recommend against the use of vasoconstrictors,
although there is no evidence to support this practice.
Similarly, the use of nitrous oxide is not contraindicated
in these patients. Care must be taken in treating patients
with SCD to avoid diffusion hypoxia at the completion of
the dental procedure.

549

The restoration of teeth, including pulpotomies, is
preferable to extraction. Pulpectomy in a nonvital tooth
is reasonable if the practitioner is fairly confident that the
tooth can remain noninfected. If the tooth is likely to persist as a focus of infection, then extraction is indicated.
The use of general anesthesia for dental procedures
must be approached cautiously in consultation with the
hematologist and anesthesiologist. Previously, the standard
protocol was to perform a direct transfusion (immediate
introduction of whole blood or blood components) or
an exchange transfusion (repetitive withdrawal of small
amounts of blood and replacement with donor blood
until a large portion of the patient’s blood has been
exchanged) before general anesthesia. The goal of the
transfusion is to increase the patient’s hemoglobin level
to higher than 10 g/dL and to decrease the hemoglobin
S level below 40%. Transfusions do not provide complete
protection against venous complications, but they may
temporarily improve the patient’s condition and reduce
the hazards of surgery.
The current thinking is to weigh the risks associated
with transfusion prior to anesthesia induction. Suggested
guidelines for performing a prophylactic transfusion before general anesthesia have been proposed. Patients with
a hemoglobin level of less than 7 g/dL and a hematocrit
of less than 20% may require a transfusion. Pediatric
patients are usually less likely to have posttransfusion
complications than are adults. A high frequency of hospitalizations is indicative of a more severe anemia, and such
patients may require transfusion before surgery. Minor
surgeries may not require a transfusion.

ACQUIRED IMMUNODEFICIENCY
SYNDROME
Acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) is a clinically defined condition caused by infection with HIV type
1 or, much less commonly, type 2. In 2011 it was estimated that nearly 1.2 million people in the United States
are infected with HIV and approximately 15% of them do
not know their status.57
The period of time from HIV infection to the appearance
of symptoms consistent with AIDS can be approximately a
decade in many adults. Consequently, HIV-infected individuals can unknowingly spread the virus to their sexual or
needle-sharing partners or, in the case of infected mothers,
to their children.
HIV infects cells of the immune system, specifically
lymphocytes and macrophages. These leukocytes contain
the greatest number of CD4 cell-surface receptors (glycoproteins), which permit attachment with viral surface proteins (GP120). Under the control of the HIV pol gene, the
virus produces the enzyme reverse transcriptase, which
is essential for incorporating viral RNA into host nuclear
DNA. The viral genome is integrated into the host-cell genome and leads to progressive and eventually irreversible
immunosuppression by producing more virus and further
killing the CD4 lymphocytes that are important modulators of the immune system. The subsequent immunodeficiency results in a variety of opportunistic infections,
malignancies (e.g., Kaposi sarcoma and lymphoma), and

550

Chapter 26

n

Management of the Medically Compromised Patient: Hematologic Disorders, Cancer, Hepatitis, and AIDS

autoimmune diseases. Diagnosis is made by screening the
serum for antibodies to HIV and is confirmed by a second
methodology such as Western blot analysis or PCR. Ongoing management is guided by the patient’s CD4+ cell
count and viral load as measured by PCR. The former is
an indication of the patient’s immune status, whereas a
higher viral load is associated with a more accelerated disease. The current antiretroviral drugs target the virus at
several steps: (1) the adhesion of the virus to the chemokine receptor CCR5, (2) the fusion of the virus to the host
cell (fusion inhibitors), (3) the integration of viral genes
into the target cell (integrase inhibitors), (4) the transcription of DNA from viral RNA by reverse transcriptase
(nucleoside, nonnucleoside, and nucleotide reverse transcriptase inhibitors), and (5) the cleavage of viral proteins
by the viral protease enzyme (protease inhibitors). The
most effective treatment strategies use a combination of
several drugs to inhibit the virus at several steps.
In the United States, nearly two thirds of newly infected men diagnosed in 2010 acquired HIV through homosexual contact, infection from illicit drug use accounted
for 12% of new cases, and 16% of infections were acquired
through heterosexual contact.58 Among infected women
in the United States, 80% acquired HIV through heterosexual contact and 19% through intravenous drug use. Almost 30% of newborns of untreated HIV-infected mothers
can acquire HIV through vertical transmission. However,
treatment of pregnant women with antiretroviral medications, including azidothymidine (AZT), has decreased
the rate of transmission by 70%. The onset of symptoms
is shortened in children who have acquired their infection prenatally and go untreated. Only 75% of untreated
babies survive to age 5 years, and by that age 50% have
severe symptoms. Now individuals infected with HIV are
treated with highly active antiretroviral therapy (HAART),
providing a combination of agents to target different stages of the viral life cycle concomitantly, making what was
once a terminal diagnosis into a manageable infection.59
Infants and children with AIDS have clinical findings
similar to those in adults. Early manifestations of untreated HIV infection include weight loss and failure to thrive,
hepatomegaly or splenomegaly, generalized lymphadenopathy, and chronic diarrhea. Unlike in adults, recurrent and severe bacterial infections are more common in
pediatric patients with untreated HIV infection, especially Pneumocystis jirovecii.

ORAL MANIFESTATIONS OF HIV INFECTION
The types of oral lesions seen in HIV infection may be
caused by fungal, viral, or bacterial infections, as well as
neoplastic and idiopathic processes. HIV infection predisposes this population of patients to a greater severity
of conventional periodontal problems. On review of the
charts of some 2500 adult patients living with HIV, Fox
and her collaborators found that a slim majority had not
received dental care in more than 2 years, and that at the
time of dental care, nearly half had an unmet oral need
and had detectable viral loads despite having been connected with HIV specialists.60 Antibacterial therapy and,
even more so, antifungal therapy should be discussed
with HIV specialists, with the understanding that these

therapeutics, though indicated, may be detrimental to
HAART efficacy.61,62

Fungal Infection
Pindborg stated that the most common HIV-associated
infection of the mouth is caused by the fungus Candida
albicans.63 Oral candidiasis is frequently present and may
lead to esophageal or disseminated candidiasis. There are
four major types of oral candidiasis: (1) pseudomembranous, (2) hyperplastic, (3) erythematous (atrophic), and
(4) angular cheilotic.
The pseudomembranous lesion is characterized by the
presence of creamy white or yellow plaque that can easily
be removed from mucosa, leaving a red, bleeding surface.
The most common locations for these lesions are the palate, buccal and labial mucosa, and dorsum of the tongue.
The hyperplastic lesion is characterized by white
plaque that cannot easily be removed. The most common location is the buccal mucosa. The erythematous
(atrophic) lesion is characterized by a red appearance.
Common locations are the palate and the dorsum of the
tongue. The lesions may also appear as spotty areas on the
buccal mucosa. Angular cheilitis is characterized by fissures radiating from the commissures of the mouth, often
associated with small, white plaque.
The treatment of C. albicans infection can be either
systemic or topical. Topical therapy involves the use of
nystatin (Mycostatin) rinses (100,000 U, 3 to 5 times
daily) or clotrimazole (Mycelex) troches for 1 to 2 weeks.
Systemic therapy calls for ketoconazole (Nizoral), 200 or
400 mg daily with food, or fluconazole (Diflucan), 100 mg
daily. Amphotericin B and its lipid preparations, azoles
such as fluconazole (administered intravenously), and
echinocandins are used for systemic infection.
Oropharnygeal candidal infections are common and
can frequently recur.64 Therefore patients may remain
on antifungal medication indefinitely. As an adjunctive
measure, mouthrinses with Peridex (0.12% chlorhexidine
digluconate; Zila Pharmaceuticals, Phoenix, Arizona, United
States) may be used. Chronic oral candidiasis, given the
available armamentarium of HAART agents, may be a poor
prognostic sign indicating a phase of more rapid decline of
immune function to the terminal phase of AIDS.

Viral Infection
In the same way that fungi can cause oral disease because of the immune dysfunction induced by HIV
infection, several viruses can produce lesions in the
mouth following colonization or reactivation. According
to Greenspan, these include herpes group viruses and
papillomaviruses.65
Oral warts may be seen in the HIV-infected patient,
with human papillomavirus as the etiologic agent. Some
warts have a raised, cauliflower-like appearance, whereas
others are well circumscribed, have a flat surface, and almost disappear when the mucosa is stretched.
Herpes simplex virus (HSV) can produce recurrent episodes of painful ulceration. Intraorally, the lesions appear
most commonly on the palate. Typically these lesions
present as vesicles that break open to form ulcers. However, they may also have an atypical appearance as slitlike

Chapter 26

n

Management of the Medically Compromised Patient: Hematologic Disorders, Cancer, Hepatitis, and AIDS

lesions on the tongue or may mimic other diseases. Diagnosis can be made from culture, PCR, or fluorescent antibody testing.
Herpetic lesions may be treated with oral acyclovir and
its relatives, valacyclovir and famciclovir. Acyclovir may
also be administered intravenously (750 mg/m2 in divided doses 3 times a day until lesions clear) in individuals
with more severe oropharyngeal lesions or in those unable to swallow.
Herpes zoster (shingles) is caused by varicella-zoster virus (VZV), the chickenpox virus. Varicella-zoster virus can
produce oral ulcerations, which are usually accompanied
by skin lesions generally restricted to one side of the face.
These lesions are also treated with acyclovir.
Oral hairy leukoplakia (HL) is a white lesion that does
not rub off, located on the lateral margins of the tongue.
The surface may be smooth, corrugated, or markedly folded. HL is seen only in patients who are HIV-infected. HL is
a virally induced lesion caused by the Epstein-Barr virus.
Treatment may include the use of high-dose acyclovir.
However, the lesions usually recur.

Bacterial Infections, Gingivitis, and Periodontitis
Progressive and premature periodontal disease is seen
relatively frequently in HIV-infected individuals and may
even be the first sign of HIV infection. Unlike conventional periodontal disease, these lesions do not respond
effectively to standard periodontal therapy. There may
be a rapid progression from mild gingivitis to advanced,
painful, spontaneously bleeding periodontal disease in
a few months. Treatment includes aggressive curettage,
Peridex (0.12% chlorhexidine digluconate) rinses 3 times
daily, and possibly antibiotic treatment.
Bacteria causing oral lesions may include Mycobacterium avium-intracellulare and Klebsiella pneumonia, among
others. Well-described conditions include linear gingival
erythema (LGE) and necrotizing ulcerative periodontitis
(NUP), which likely represent dysbiosis of the microflora.
Many of the oral lesions seen in association with HIV
infection are not new entities; rather, they are known
diseases that either follow an atypical course or show an
unusual response to treatment. This is frequently the case
with neoplasms as well.

Neoplasms
Kaposi sarcoma, secondary to transformation induced
by human herpes virus-8 infection, is the most common
malignancy seen in AIDS and, according to Silverman,
occurs in 15% to 20% of adult patients with AIDS.66 Intraoral lesions may occur alone or along with skin, visceral,
and lymph node lesions. The first lesions of Kaposi sarcoma often appear in the mouth. They may be red, blue,
or purple, flat or raised, and solitary or multiple. The most
common oral site is the hard palate, although lesions may
be found on any part of the oral mucosa. Treatment for
aggressive lesions involves radiation, laser surgery, or chemotherapy. Conventional surgery may be appropriate for
small lesions.
The group of malignancies whose incidence is growing the fastest among patients with AIDS is the lymphomas, most commonly the non-Hodgkin lymphomas. The

551

first manifestation may be a firm, painless swelling in the
mouth. Biopsies of these growths are indicated to establish a diagnosis. Treatment includes multidrug chemotherapy and radiation. Less than 20% of patients survive 2
years; the mean survival time is approximately 6 months
from diagnosis.
Oral squamous cell carcinomas also occur more frequently in the HIV-infected population. In patients
with HIV/AIDS who develop malignancies, their HAART
should be optimized while definitive oncologic therapy
is pending.59

Idiopathic Lesions
Greenspan described oral ulcers of unknown etiology
that are being reported with increasing frequency in
people with HIV infection.65 The ulcers resemble aphthous lesions, appearing as well-circumscribed ulcers
with an erythematous margin. Patients sometimes exhibit extremely large and painful necrotic ulcers that
may persist for several weeks. These ulcers are more common among pediatric patients. The serum and oral secretions, if screened by PCR for human herpes viruses (EBV,
HHV6, HHV7), are not uncommonly positive, but this
more likely represents asymptomatic shedding rather
than identification of an untreated coinfection. In the
patient on appropriate HAART therapy, topical steroids
are reasonable and safe.
Salivary gland swelling has been seen in both adults
and children with HIV infection. The cause of the swelling is unknown and may be combinational. It usually
involves the parotid glands and is also accompanied by
xerostomia. These patients may be best evaluated with
fine-needle aspiration, especially if there is a focal mass.
HIV-infected patients may develop oral manifestations
of autoimmune disorders, including immune thrombocytopenic purpura. Oral lesions appear as small, bloodfilled purpuric lesions or petechiae. Spontaneous gingival
bleeding may also occur.

LEUKEMIA
Malignancy is second only to accidents as the leading
cause of death in children. Leukemias are hematopoietic
malignancies in which abnormal leukocytes (blast cells)
proliferate in the bone marrow, replacing normal cells,
and disseminate into the peripheral blood, accumulating
in other tissues and organs of the body.
Leukemia is classified according to the morphology of
the predominant abnormal leukocytes in the bone marrow (Table 26-1). These types are further categorized as
acute or chronic, depending on the clinical course and
the degree of differentiation, or maturation, of the predominant abnormal cells.
In the United States, about one of every 6000 children
under the age of 20 years is diagnosed each year with
cancer. Acute leukemia is the most common malignancy
in children and adolescents, with about 4000 new cases
diagnosed annually in the United States. Thus acute leukemia accounts for about one third of all childhood malignancies; of these, approximately 75% are lymphocytic
(acute lymphocytic leukemia, or ALL) and 25% are acute

552

Chapter 26

n

Management of the Medically Compromised Patient: Hematologic Disorders, Cancer, Hepatitis, and AIDS

Table 26-1
Childhood Leukemias
Type

Age and White Blood Cell
Count (WBC) at Onset

Prognosis

Treatment

Vincristine, l-asparaginase,
prednisone, dexamethasone,
6-mercaptopurine, methotrexate, daunomycin, doxorubicin, cytosine arabinoside
[araC], cyclophosphamide

Acute lymphocytic
(ALL)

Peak age, 3-6 years

>94% remission induction,
varies with age and
presenting WBC count

Standard risk

1-9 years with WBC
<50,000/mm3
>10 years or any age with
WBC >50,000/mm3
<1 year, any WBC

80%-90% EFS at 60 months

Poor risk
Infants
Acute myelogenous
(AML)

Myelocytic (AML)

Older children and
adolescents

Monocytic or
myelomonocytic
(AmoL; AMML)
Promyelocytic (APL)

Infants and young
children more
common
Uncommon; seen in
older children

Erythroleukemia
Megakaryocytic
leukemia

Very rare
Very rare

Chronic myelocytic
(CML)
Juvenile,
Philadelphia
chromosomenegative
Adult, Philadelphia
chromosomepositive

Chronic lymphocytic

50%-60% EFS at 60 months
20%-30% EFS at 60 months
80% remission induction;
40% EFS at 36 months;
>95% EFS in children with
Down syndrome younger
than 2 years of age
Presence of (t8;21) cytogenetic
abnormality yields better
outcome ∼70% survival,
whereas abnormalities of
11q23, monosomy 5 or 7
portend poor prognosis (20%)
Presence of cytogenetic
abnormality (inv 16) yields
better outcome ∼70% survival
Presence of cytogenetic
abnormality (t15;17)
yields better outcome
∼70% survival
Generally very poor
Generally very poor, in young
Down syndrome patients—
excellent prognosis

Cytosine arabinoside, daunomycin, VP-16, 6-thioguanine,
idarubicin, dexamethasone;
hematopoietic stem cell
transplantation*

Responds to all trans-retinoic
acid and arsenic trioxide

Infants and toddlers,
very rare

Median survival <9
months

Hematopoietic stem cell
transplantation†

Older children and
adolescents

Chronic phase about 2-4 years,
then death in blast cell crisis,
usually of AML, which is
resistant to therapy; great
improvement with imatinib

Imatinib (Gleevec), hydroxyurea; interferon alpha;
hematopoietic stem cell
transplantation†

Not seen in children

*Sibling HLA-matched hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT) is considered the treatment of choice for most subtypes of acute myelogenous leukemia. Each sibling has one chance in four of being a perfect match. The patient is put into remission by standard chemotherapy before
bone marrow transplantation. Of AML patients undergoing transplantation in first remission, 60% show no evidence of disease after 2 years.
†Hematopoietic stem cell transplantation has been the treatment of choice for adult and juvenile chronic myelocytic leukemia. Response to standard chemotherapy is generally poor. Imatinib, a selective inhibitor of tyrosine kinase at the breakpoint cluster region on the ABL gene (causative
abnormality in CML), is highly effective and well tolerated in all phases of CML when taken orally. Because long-term oral imatinib has been
successful in children, the role and timing of HSCT are somewhat controversial in the treatment of childhood Philadelphia chromosome-positive
CML. Transplantation for adult-type CML in first chronic phase using a matched sibling donor gives 60% disease-free survival at 2 years.
EFS, Event-free survival.
Courtesy Dr. Randy Hock and Dr. Alexandra Cheerua.

Chapter 26

n

Management of the Medically Compromised Patient: Hematologic Disorders, Cancer, Hepatitis, and AIDS

myelogenous leukemia (AML). Chronic leukemia in children is rare, accounting for less than 2% of all cases.
The peak incidence of childhood leukemia is at between 2 and 5 years of age. Although the cause of leukemia is unknown, ionizing radiation, certain chemical
agents, and genetic factors have been implicated. For example, children with chromosomal abnormalities (Down
syndrome and Bloom syndrome), children with an identical twin who has leukemia, and children with immunologic disorders have an increased risk for leukemia. In the
United States, leukemia rates for white children are about
1.5 times those for black children.67
The clinical manifestations of acute leukemia are
caused by the infiltration of leukemia cells into tissues
and organs. Infiltration and proliferation of leukemia cells
in the bone marrow lead to anemia, thrombocytopenia,
and granulocytopenia. Because these cytopenias develop
gradually, the onset of the disease is frequently insidious.
The history at presentation may reveal increased irritability, lethargy, persistent fever, vague bone pain, and easy
bruising. Some of the more common findings on initial
physical examination are pallor, fever, tachycardia, adenopathy, hepatosplenomegaly, petechiae, cutaneous
bruises, gingival bleeding, and evidence of infection.
In approximately 90% of the cases of acute leukemia,
a peripheral blood smear reveals anemia and thrombocytopenia. In about 65% of cases the white blood
cell count is low or normal, but it may be greater than
50,000 cells/mm3.
When a new case of leukemia is diagnosed, the patient
is hospitalized and therapy is directed toward stabilizing the patient physiologically, transfusing blood products to correct anemia and control bleeding, identifying
and eliminating infection, evaluating renal and hepatic
functions, and preparing the patient for chemotherapy.
These interventions proceed while the definitive studies
to determine the exact type of leukemia are undertaken,
including a bone marrow aspiration for microscopic analysis, special cytochemical staining, immunophenotyping
by flow cytometry, and cytogenetic analysis. The goal of
treatment is to induce and maintain a complete remission, which is defined as resolution of the physical findings of leukemia (e.g., adenopathy, hepatosplenomegaly,
petechiae) and normalization of peripheral blood counts
and bone marrow (less than 5% blast cells).
The term minimal residual disease (MRD) has been applied when multiple-parameter flow cytometry and sometimes PCR technology are used to denote that less than
0.1% blast cells are found. Remission with MRD is a better
prognostic factor than the old definition of remission.
The basic principle of treatment of ALL is substantially
different from that for AML or nonlymphocytic leukemia
(ANLL). In general, the treatment of ANLL is very intense
and results in profound bone marrow hypoplasia, but the
treatment duration is usually short (less than 1 year). For
ALL, the treatment is less intense but more prolonged (2.5
to 3.5 years).
Overall, the treatment regimens vary considerably, depending on prognostic factors and the parameters being
evaluated by the strategists’ cooperative group (e.g., Children’s Oncology Group). The initial phase of ALL treatment,

553

induction, incorporates the use of a combination of anti­
leukemic drugs at staggered intervals during a 4-week
regimen (Table 26-2). This combination of drugs should
rapidly destroy the leukemic cells yet maintain the regenerative potential of the nonmalignant hematopoietic
cells within the bone marrow. About 95% of patients with
ALL will be in complete remission at day 28 of therapy.
The second phase, consolidation, attempts to consolidate
remission and intensify prophylactic central nervous
system (CNS) treatment. Prevention of CNS relapse uses
intrathecally administered chemotherapy (methotrexate
with or without cytosine arabinoside and hydrocortisone)
to destroy leukemic cells within CNS. Methotrexate is instilled directly into the lumbar spinal fluid, because most
antileukemic drugs do not readily cross the blood-brain
barrier. Intensive intrathecal chemotherapy to prevent
CNS relapse has replaced cranial irradiation for patients
in the good and intermediate-risk groups of ALL patients.
However, both cranial irradiation and intrathecal chemotherapy are still used to prevent CNS relapse in high-risk
ALL patients. The third phase, interim maintenance, uses
a combination of agents that are relatively nontoxic and
requires only monthly visits to the outpatient clinic. In
most cases a fourth phase, delayed intensification, follows
interim maintenance. This serves to intensify antileukemic therapy again after a short period of less intensive
therapy. The addition of a late phase of intensive therapy substantially improves survival in patients with ALL.
Following delayed intensification, therapy continues for
2 years for girls and 3 years for boys (maintenance
phase), with chemotherapeutic agents given as in interim
maintenance.
The prognosis for a child with acute leukemia has
improved dramatically over the past several decades.
Thirty-five years ago, there would have been little need to
discuss dental treatment for a child with leukemia because
the disease was invariably fatal—in most cases within
6 months of diagnosis. Today with the development of
new and better antileukemia drugs, use of intensive combination drug therapy, selective incorporation of radiation
therapy for certain patients, and improvements in diagnostic techniques and general supportive care, the overall
survival for all children with ALL is now about 85%.
Pretreatment prognostic factors identify patients who
are likely to benefit from either standard or more intensive therapy. Factors that identify patients who are likely
to benefit from the type of therapy just outlined, which
causes relatively minimal toxicity, are patient age between 1 and 10 years, a white blood cell count of less than
50,000/mm3, lymphoblast morphology that is not of the
Burkitt type, and the absence of certain cytogenetic abnormalities [t(4;11); t(9;22)] (also known as the Philadelphia chromosome) or hypoploidy in the lymphoblasts.
The presence of either the TEL-AML1 fusion [t(12;21)
(p13;q22)] or the simultaneous trisomies of chromosomes
4, 10, and 17 in the lymphoblasts correlates with an improved prognosis and may qualify these children for less
strenuous therapy.
Children with ALL who are at particularly high risk are
those who are younger than 1 year of age at diagnosis,
have a high initial white blood cell count, or have the

554

Chapter 26

n

Management of the Medically Compromised Patient: Hematologic Disorders, Cancer, Hepatitis, and AIDS

Table 26-2
Major Chemotherapeutic Agents and Their Side Effects
Agent

Nausea*

Bone Marrow
Suppression

Hair Loss

Stomatitis/
Ulcers

Renal

Neurologic

Alkylating Agents
Carboplatin
Cisplatin

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

No

No

Yes
(severe)
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes

Yes

No

No

Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes

No
No
Yes

No
No
No

Peripheral
neuropathy
Seizures (rare)
Somnolence
No

No

No

Yes

No; jaw pain

No

Daunomycin‡
Doxorubicin‡
Idarubicin‡
Antimetabolites
Cytosine arabinoside
(araC)
Methotrexate

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

No
No
No
No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

6-Mercaptopurine
Plant alkaloids
Etoposide
Miscellaneous
Dexamethasone
Prednisone

Yes

Yes

Mild

Rare

No

Yes
No

Yes
No

Yes
No

No
No

No
No

No

No

No

No

No

l-Asparaginase¶

No

No

No

No

No

Cyclophosphamide
Ifosfamide
Antibiotics
Actinomycin D
Vincristine†

Peripheral
neuropathy,
seizures (rare)
No
No
No
Cerebellar
dysfunction
Leukoencephalopathy§
No
No
Pseudotumor;
psychoses
Pseudotumor;
psychoses
Seizures (rare),
thrombosis

*Nausea is substantially alleviated by the judicious use of antiemetics.
†These agents cause severe skin burns if they extravasate from the vein.
‡High cumulative doses may result in cardiac toxicity.
§Leukoencephalopathy is usually seen with methotrexate in conjunction with whole-brain radiation.
¶l-Asparaginase may cause pancreatitis and diabetes.

cytogenetic abnormalities mentioned above, or have a
persistence of identified disease after induction therapy.
More intrusive treatment regimens are used for these
patients.
The early response to induction chemotherapy is also
a strong predictor of outcome for patients with ALL.68,69
Current clinical trials in leukemia are using flow cytometry and molecular techniques to detect blast cells not
visible morphologically in bone marrow aspirates. Quantification of this MRD is being used as an additional tool
to direct therapy so that children can receive risk-based
adjusted therapy.
The prognosis for children with AML has improved
significantly over the past several years, with event-free
survivals of approximately 50% (at 3 years) for children
receiving chemotherapy and somewhat higher percentages for patients undergoing allogeneic hematopoietic
stem cell transplantation from a matched sibling after

achieving remission with chemotherapy.70 The treatment regimens are intrusive and result in profound
bone marrow suppression. These patients have severe
prolonged neutropenia, necessitating long hospitalizations. They often have serious infections and severe
mucositis.

ORAL MANIFESTATIONS OF LEUKEMIA
Pathologic changes in the oral cavity as a result of leukemia occur frequently. Oral signs or symptoms suggestive of leukemia have been reported in as many as 75%
of adults and 29% of children with leukemia. The lower
incidence of oral manifestations in children can be attributed in part to the early age at diagnosis and the high percentage of ALL in the pediatric age group. The incidence
of ALL peaks at 3 years of age, when preexisting inflammatory and degenerative changes are comparatively less
frequent.

Chapter 26

n

Management of the Medically Compromised Patient: Hematologic Disorders, Cancer, Hepatitis, and AIDS

Figure 26-3 Several small ecchymoses on the dorsal surface

of the tongue in a 10-year-old girl with acute lymphocytic
leukemia. (Courtesy Dr. Bruce W. Vash.)

Abnormalities in or around the oral cavity occur in all
types of leukemia and in all age groups. However, oral
pathologies are more commonly observed in acute leukemias than in chronic leukemias. Oral findings suggestive
of leukemia are also more common in AML than in ALL.
The most frequently reported oral abnormalities attributed to the leukemic process include regional lymphadenopathy, mucous membrane petechiae and ecchymoses,
gingival bleeding, gingival hypertrophy, pallor, and nonspecific ulcerations. Manifestations seen occasionally are
cranial nerve palsies, chin and lip paresthesias, odontalgia, jaw pain, loose teeth, extruded teeth, and gangrenous
stomatitis. Each of these findings has been reported in
all types of leukemia. Regional lymphadenopathy is the
most frequently reported finding. Gingival abnormalities,
including hypertrophy and bleeding, are more common
in patients with AML, whereas petechiae and ecchymoses
are more common in those with ALL.
Like the systemic manifestations of leukemia, oral
changes can be attributed to anemia, granulocytopenia,
and thrombocytopenia, all of which result from the replacement of normal bone marrow elements by undifferentiated blast cells or direct invasion of tissue by
these leukemic cells. Very high circulating white blood
cell numbers in the peripheral blood can lead to stasis
in small vascular channels. The subsequent tissue anoxia
results in areas of necrosis and ulceration that can readily become infected by opportunistic oral microorganisms in patients with neutropenia. A person with severe
thrombocytopenia, having lost the capacity to maintain
vascular integrity, is likely to bleed spontaneously. Clinical manifestations are petechiae or ecchymoses of the oral
mucosa or frank bleeding from the gingival sulcus (Figs.
26-3 and 26-4). The propensity for gingival bleeding is
greatly increased in persons with deficient oral hygiene
because accumulated plaque and debris are significant local irritants.
Direct invasion of tissue by an infiltrate of leukemic
cells can produce gingival hypertrophy. Such gingival
changes can occur despite excellent oral hygiene. Infiltration of leukemic cells along vascular channels can

555

Figure 26-4 Petechia along the gingival sulcus in a 14-year-

old female with acute lymphocytic leukemia. (Courtesy
Dr. Bruce W. Vash.)

result in strangulation of pulpal tissue and spontaneous
abscess formation as a result of infection or focal areas
of liquefaction necrosis in the dental pulp of clinically
and radiographically sound teeth. In a similar fashion
the teeth may rapidly loosen as a result of necrosis of
PDL.
Skeletal lesions caused by leukemic infiltration of
bone are common in childhood leukemia. The most
common finding is a generalized osteoporosis caused by
enlargement of the Haversian and Volkmann canals. Osteolytic lesions resulting from focal areas of hemorrhage and
necrosis and leading to loss of trabecular bone are also
common.
Evidence of skeletal lesions is visible on dental radiographs in up to 63% of children with acute leukemia.
Manifestations in the jaws include generalized loss of trabeculation, destruction of the crypts of developing teeth,
loss of lamina dura, widening of the PDL space, and displacement of teeth and tooth buds (Fig. 26-5). Because
none of the oral changes is a pathognomonic sign of leukemia and all can be associated with numerous local or
systemic disease processes, a diagnosis of leukemia cannot be based on oral findings alone. Such changes should,
however, alert the clinician to the possibility of malignancy as the underlying cause.

DENTAL MANAGEMENT OF PATIENTS
WITH LEUKEMIA
Before any dental treatment is administered to a child
with leukemia, the child’s hematologist/oncologist or primary care physician should be consulted. The following
information should be ascertained:
  
1.	Primary medical diagnosis
2.	Anticipated clinical course and prognosis
3.	Present and future therapeutic modalities
4.	Present general state of health
5.	Present hematologic status
  
It is also important to establish, by consultation with
the patient’s physician, when dental treatment may be
most propitious and to schedule the patient’s treatment
accordingly. The proposed procedures should be discussed to determine if they are appropriate.

556

Chapter 26

n

Management of the Medically Compromised Patient: Hematologic Disorders, Cancer, Hepatitis, and AIDS

Figure 26-5 Panoramic radiograph of a patient with acute myelocytic leukemia resulting in the displacement of the maxillary

right permanent molar. (Courtesy Dr. Bruce W. Vash.)

For a child whose first remission has not yet been
attained or one who is in relapse, all elective dental
procedures should be deferred. However, it is essential
that potential sources of systemic infection within the
oral cavity be controlled or eradicated whenever they
are recognized (e.g., immediate extraction of carious
primary teeth with pulpal involvement).
Routine preventive, restorative, and surgical procedures can usually be provided for a patient who is in
complete remission yet is undergoing chemotherapy.
The time when such procedures may be completed
without complications will depend on the specific
agents administered and the time of administration.
Before the appointment—preferably the same day—a
blood cell profile (complete blood count) and platelet
count should be obtained to confirm that the patient is
not unexpectedly at undue risk for hemorrhage or infection. A patient who has been in complete remission for
at least 2 years and no longer requires chemotherapy
may be treated in an essentially normal manner. A preappointment blood workup is not necessary.
Pulp therapy on primary teeth is contraindicated in any
patient with a history of leukemia. Endodontic treatment
for permanent teeth is not recommended for any patient
with leukemia who may have a chronic, intermittent suppression of granulocytes. Even with the most exacting
technique, an area of chronic inflammatory tissue may
remain in the periapical region of endodontically treated
teeth. An area of low-grade, chronic inflammation in a
healthy patient is generally well tolerated, but in an immunosuppressed, neutropenic patient the same area can act as
an anachoretic focus with devastating sequelae. The decision to perform an endodontic procedure on a patient who
has been in prolonged complete remission and who is not
undergoing chemotherapy must be made by the dentist.

Table 26-3
Clinical Importance of Platelet Count*
Count (cells/mm3)

Significance

150,000-400,000
50,000-150,000

Normal
Bleeding time is prolonged, but
patient would tolerate most
routine procedures
At moderate risk for bleeding; defer
elective surgical procedures
At significant risk for bleeding;
defer elective dental procedures

20,000-50,000
<20,000

*An absolute indication for platelet transfusion is significant bleeding. If the count is <20,000 to 30,000 cells/mm3, the patient
should probably be given prophylactic platelet transfusion before
dental procedures. Indiscriminate use of platelet therapy may lead
to the development of antiplatelet antibodies.
Courtesy Dr. Thomas D. Coates.

A platelet level of 100,000/mm3 is adequate for most
dental procedures (Table 26-3). Routine preventive and
restorative treatment, including nonblock injections, may
be considered when the platelet count is at least 50,000/
mm3. With inadequate oral hygiene, unhealthy periodontal tissues, and the presence of local irritants, hemorrhage from the gingival sulcus may be observed when
platelet counts are between 20,000 and 50,000/mm3.
Such hemorrhaging is usually noted only after manipulation of the tissues, such as during toothbrushing. If the
platelet count is lower than 20,000/mm3, all the intraoral
mucosal tissues may show clinical evidence of spontaneous hemorrhaging (e.g., petechiae, ecchymoses, or frank
hemorrhage). No dental treatment should be performed

Chapter 26

n

Management of the Medically Compromised Patient: Hematologic Disorders, Cancer, Hepatitis, and AIDS

Table 26-4
Clinical Importance of White Blood Cell
Count
ANC*

Significance

>1500
500-1000

Normal
Patient at some risk for infection; defer
elective procedures that could induce
significant transient bacteremia
Patient must be admitted to hospital
if febrile and given broad-spectrum
antibiotics; at moderate risk for sepsis;
defer all elective dental procedures
At significant risk for sepsis

200-500

<200

*ANC, absolute neutrophil count; it is computed as follows:
ANC = (% of polymorphonuclear leukocytes + % of bands) × total
white count ÷ 100
Courtesy Dr. Thomas D. Coates.

at such a time without a preceding prophylactic platelet
transfusion. Good oral hygiene must be maintained while
the platelet count is at this level, but it may be necessary
to discontinue the use of a toothbrush and to substitute
cleaning with moist gauze wipes, supplemented by frequent saline rinses.
The absolute neutrophil count (ANC) is an indicator of
the host’s ability to suppress or eliminate infection. It is
calculated by the following formula:
ANC = (% of neutrophils + % of bands)
× total white count ÷ 100

The clinical significance of ANC is presented in Table
26-4. If ANC is less than 1000/mm3, elective dental treatment should be deferred. A leukemic patient with a low
ANC may require prophylactic broad-spectrum antibiotic
therapy before certain dental procedures. The patient’s
physician should be consulted regarding the appropriate
drugs and dosages.
Infection and hemorrhage are the primary causes of
death other than resistant disease or relapse in children
with leukemia. Therefore the primary objective of dental
treatment in a child with leukemia should be the prevention, control, and eradication of oral inflammation, hemorrhage, and infection.
Frequently, initial oral manifestations of bleeding or
infection are observed in association with an unhealthy
periodontium. In patients with leukemia who are neutropenic or who are being treated with corticosteroids,
the true degree of periodontal inflammation or infection
may be masked, because the cardinal signs of inflammation may not be apparent. There is a much greater propensity for gingival bleeding when the periodontium
is unhealthy. When oral hygiene is neglected and local
irritants are present, spontaneous hemorrhaging from
the gingival sulcus may be observed if the patient is
thrombocytopenic.

557

It is imperative that a patient who is diagnosed as
having leukemia be enrolled in a good preventive dental
care program in which special emphasis is placed on the
initiation and maintenance of a comprehensive oral hygiene regimen. The use of a soft nylon toothbrush for the
removal of plaque is recommended, even if the patient
is thrombocytopenic. As long as the gingiva remains in
a healthy state and its manipulation by brushing does
not induce significant hemorrhage, it is not appropriate
to discontinue the use of a toothbrush because of the
platelet level alone. The practicality of flossing must be
assessed on an individual basis.
It is important that significant local irritants, including orthodontic appliances, be removed. Scaling and
subgingival curettage should not necessarily be perceived as elective dental treatment in all patients. This
is especially true if the anticipated clinical course may
place the patient at high risk for hemorrhage and infection. Patients with classic leukemic gingivitis experience
various degrees of discomfort. The use of warm saline
rinses several times each day may assist in the relief of
symptoms.
Erosive or ulcerative lesions are common in children
with leukemia. These lesions are often associated with
the use of certain chemotherapeutic agents (see Table
26-2), especially methotrexate and the anthracycline
antibiotics daunomycin and doxorubicin. The lesions
may be an early indicator of drug toxicity. After administration of the drug is discontinued and ANC has recovered, these lesions usually disappear within a few days.
Treatment is directed toward the relief of discomfort
(Table 26-5).
In a patient who is granulocytopenic, trauma may
result in the occurrence of ulcerative lesions, especially
along the lateral border of the tongue and buccal mucosa. The clinical course of these ulcerations is generally
benign, although the time necessary for healing may be
prolonged. Use of topical obtundents for pain may be the
only treatment indicated.
Infrequent, deep lesions will bleed spontaneously or
as a result of trauma. Local measures, such as the topical application of either bovine thrombin or Avitene and
the placement of an oral adhesive for protection, may be
beneficial.
In a patient who is physically debilitated or who is in
relapse, septic, and severely granulocytopenic, ulcerative
lesions require close observation. Such lesions may serve
as a nidus for the proliferation of microorganisms, which
can lead to potentially fatal viral, fungal, or bacterial infection. Therefore specimens from these ulcerative lesions
should be cultured and subsequent sensitivity testing
performed, and antibiotic therapy should be initiated or
modified accordingly.
Candidiasis is common in children with leukemia.
They are especially susceptible to this fungal infection
because of (1) general physical debilitation, (2) immunosuppression, (3) prolonged antibiotic therapy, (4) chemotherapy, and (5) poor oral hygiene. The following topical
use of nystatin can be particularly beneficial:
  
•	Nystatin oral suspension, 100,000 U/mL

558

Chapter 26

n

Management of the Medically Compromised Patient: Hematologic Disorders, Cancer, Hepatitis, and AIDS

Table 26-5
Topical Obtundents for Oral Pain (Frequently Used at James Whitcomb Riley Hospital for Children
and St. Vincent Children’s Hospital)
Combination

Administration

Indications

Swish 5-10 mL for 1 minute;
then expectorate

Generalized stomatitis and mild
discomfort

Swish 5-10 mL for 1 minute;
then expectorate

Generalized stomatitis and mild
discomfort

Apply locally to lesions with
cotton swab

Discrete, painful lesions

Benacort-Tetrastat (Mary’s Magic Potion)

Hydrocortisone powder 60 mg
Tetracycline 1.5 g
Nystatin suspension 100,000 U/mL 60 mL
Benadryl elixir qs 240 L
Philadelphia Mouthwash*

Benadryl elixir 90 mL
Maalox suspension 90 mL
Viscous lidocaine 2% 90 mL
Distilled water 180 mL
Cherry or vanilla flavoring to taste
Orabase with benzocaine, or viscous lidocaine
2%, or dyclonine HCl 0.5%
*Use should be supervised to prevent lidocaine toxicity.

•	Swish 5 mL for 5 minutes and then swallow
•	Repeat every 6 hours; continue for 48 hours after lesions disappear
  
In more resistant cases of oral candidiasis, fluconazole
may be useful, administered once daily either orally or
intravenously (in young children, 6 mg/kg on day 1, then
3 mg/kg to a maximum of 12 mg/kg per day; in older children and adults, 200 mg on day 1, then 100 mg).
For patients who are thrombocytopenic or at risk for
intermittent episodes of thrombocytopenia because of
chemotherapy or active disease, the dentist should avoid
prescribing drugs that may alter platelet function, such as
salicylates (aspirin) and nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory
drugs.

HEMATOPOIETIC STEM CELL
TRANSPLANTATION
The transplantation of hematopoietic stem cells can be curative for a variety of disorders, including aplastic anemia,
thalassemia, and severe combined immunodeficiency.
Stem cell transplantation has also been shown to be effective as rescue therapy for patients undergoing extremely aggressive treatment for leukemia in which both lethal doses
of chemotherapy and total-body irradiation are used to
destroy all bone marrow elements, including normal marrow cells. Intensive chemotherapy, total-body irradiation,
and stem cell rescue are being used in experimental treatment protocols for children with very aggressive malignancies (e.g., advanced neuroblastoma and Ewing sarcoma).
As with any organ transplantation, hematopoietic
stem cell transplantation candidates must have a compatible donor. Suitable stem cell donors may include
HLA-compatible siblings or matched unrelated donors.
In some situations, placental cord blood can be used.

In certain cases autologous transplantation is performed
in which the patient’s own bone marrow or peripheral
blood stem cells are harvested, stored, and then returned
to the patient after intensive treatment and after remission has been achieved.
In almost all organ transplantation procedures,
host rejection of the transplanted organ and infection
are prime reasons for treatment failure. An additional
complication in allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell
transplantation is graft-versus-host disease (GVHD), in
which immunocompetent donor lymphocytes attack
the recipient host cells.
During and after hematopoietic stem cell transplantation, the most common cause of serious morbidity and
mortality is infection. The risk for infection from exogenous sources is reduced by good handwashing. Despite
multiple-agent antibacterial, antifungal, and antiviral
therapy, endogenous opportunistic organisms are usually
the cause of life-threatening infection in hematopoietic
stem cell transplantation patients, who, because of ablated
bone marrow function, are unable to mount protective
inflammatory and immune responses before engraftment
of donor bone marrow.

ORAL COMPLICATIONS OF BONE MARROW
TRANSPLANTATION
The oral complications of bone marrow transplantation differ from those seen during conventional therapy for malignant disease only in degree and duration.
Oral ulceration, mucositis, and transient salivary gland
dysfunction are frequent consequences of stomatotoxic chemotherapy and total-body irradiation. Minor
trauma to atrophic mucous membranes often results
in self-induced ulceration of the buccal mucosa, lips,
and tongue. Thrombocytopenic gingival bleeding

Chapter 26

n

Management of the Medically Compromised Patient: Hematologic Disorders, Cancer, Hepatitis, and AIDS

and bleeding from oral ulcerations are also frequently
­encountered.
Oral bleeding responds well to platelet transfusions
and intravenous aminocaproic acid (Amicar). Topical application of Avitene (bovine corium collagen hydrochloride), powdered thrombin, and pressure are often effective
for control of localized bleeding and often must be relied
on in those cases in which the patient fails to respond to
transfused platelets.
Oral ulceration and mucositis are common sequelae of
cancer treatment, and they resolve with the return of bone
marrow function and rising absolute neutrophil counts.
Interim treatment is directed toward palliation and the
prevention of secondary infection. An expert panel has
recently reviewed and evaluated basic oral care interventions and management approaches to prevent and treat
oral mucositis in cancer patients.71,72 The conclusions
were that there is evidence to support the use of basic
oral care protocols for all patients receiving radiation and/
or chemotherapy. The evidence does not support the use
of chlorhexidine for the prevention of mucositis in patients
receiving head and neck radiotherapy. Moreover, recommendations were developed against the topical use of antimicrobials and sucralfate for the prevention of radiation
or chemotherapy mucositis. This same expert panel could
not develop guidelines for the use of mixed-­medication
mouthwashes (such as Mary’s Magic Potion; see Table
26-5). However, many clinicians believe that using these
customized medication mouthwashes can provide comfort. Any of the topically applied obtundent solutions or
topical local anesthetics mentioned previously may be
used. The efficacy of each will vary among patients, and
in some cases only potent systemic analgesics will provide
relief. In all cases, however, infection must be suspected,
and specimens from all lesions should be cultured and
growing organisms tested for antibiotic susceptibility.

GRAFT-VERSUS-HOST DISEASE
A major problem of allogeneic bone marrow transplantation is the development of GVHD. This disorder appears
to result from an interaction between donor immunocompetent cells and recipient cells that display disparate
antigens. The acute form of the disease involves the lymphoid system, skin, liver, and gastrointestinal tract. Cutaneous and oral mucosal involvement in chronic GVHD is
common and is manifested as painful overt mucosal erythema, reticular or lichenoid eruptions, or desquamation
and ulceration. Treatment with dexamethasone oral rinses
may be helpful in cases of severe mucosal involvement
in chronic GVHD. Mucosal involvement may be accompanied by salivary gland dysfunction with xerostomia,
dysphagia, and dysgeusia.
Treatment of both acute and chronic GVHD is directed
at correcting, masking, or preventing disordered immune
regulation. Therapies with low- and high-dose steroids
(prednisone, dexamethasone), antithymocyte globulin,
cyclosporin, azathioprine, or methotrexate have been attempted with mixed results. Although severe acute GVHD
can be rapidly fatal, chronic GVHD is usually transient
and controllable with systemic therapy. The goals of

559

t­herapy for mucosal and salivary gland manifestations,
which relies on abundant rinses, are palliation and the
prevention of secondary infection.
Of note, the positive side of GVHD is an associated
graft-vs.-leukemia effect. In both acute and chronic
GVHD, the immune response associated with GVHD
appears to affect leukemia cells in that there is an inverse
relationship between the severity of GVHD and the incidence of relapse.

PRETRANSPLANTATION PREPARATION
Bone marrow transplantation programs place a high priority on pretransplantation dental care and daily mouth
care in the transplant unit. The primary goal of this oral
health care protocol is to prevent, reduce in severity, or
palliatively relieve oral problems involved in the oral care
of patients receiving oncologic therapy. The integrity of
the oral cavity is maintained by keeping the oral structures, both hard and soft tissues, clean, moist, and free of
infection. The resultant decrease in septic episodes in the
oral cavity should diminish the patient’s morbidity and
mortality, because the mouth is the most common source
of infection in these patients.
Four weeks before bone marrow transplantation, all
candidates for this procedure should receive a thorough
clinical and radiographic oral examination during the
workup phase initiated from the oncology physician’s
consult. The resultant dental treatment plan, along with
the primary goals of oral health care, is discussed with
the patient’s oncologist, the patient, and the parents.
Each patient is also informed of all potential oral complications of bone marrow transplantation and GVHD.
Along with professional preventive dental care, each
patient should receive instruction in daily mouth care,
including brushing and flossing. The daily use of selfapplied topical fluoride gel and Peridex rinse (every 12
hours) is recommended. Dental appointments are scheduled for any necessary periodontal, restorative, or oral
surgery treatment, if indicated, to eliminate and control
oral infections or conditions that may lead to episodic
problems. Potential foci of infection or bleeding, such
as pulpally involved teeth, periodontally involved teeth,
partially erupted teeth, exfoliating primary teeth and
carious teeth, or teeth with defective restorations, must
be treated before the patient’s admission to the transplant unit. Recommended treatment should ideally be
completed at least 2 weeks before admission to allow for
healing of violated tissues and the reestablishment of
optimal oral hygiene.
Unfortunately, there are times when the patient’s
medical status necessitates admission for transplantation before all dental treatment can be completed. Therefore the minimum preadmission dental requirement is a
mouth free of foci of acute infection and free of physical
irritants. Each patient must receive thorough supragingival and subgingival scaling and prophylaxis; open caries
lesions and caries lesions approaching the pulp must be
restored, and abscessed teeth, teeth with severe periodontal involvement, and exfoliating primary teeth causing
gingival irritation must be removed.

560

Chapter 26

n

Management of the Medically Compromised Patient: Hematologic Disorders, Cancer, Hepatitis, and AIDS

Box 26-1
Treatment of Mucositis and Candidiasis (Guidelines for Nursing Staff)
MILD MUCOSITIS

•	Continue same oral regimen and add 2% sodium
bicarbonate.
•	Chart condition of oral cavity each shift; notify doctor of
any change from the previous day or shift.
MODERATE OR SEVERE MUCOSITIS

•	Obtain order for pain medication to be administered
either before oral care or as a continuous drip (i.e.,
morphine sulphate); may require bolus administration in
addition to continuous drip.
•	Follow same regimen as with mild mucositis, using both
2% sodium bicarbonate and Peridex with Toothette.
•	Use Peridex every 4 hours; if patient is having difficulty

ADMISSION AND NURSING INTERVENTIONS
Peridex has been shown to be effective in minimizing the
septic episodes in the oral cavity when used with other chemotherapeutic agents. On admission, the patient should
be instructed to brush his or her teeth 3 times a day with
a Peridex-soaked ultrasoft toothbrush (e.g., Sensodyne
Gentle, GlaxoSmithKline Consumer Healthcare, Bentford,
U.K.). When the platelet count is below 20,000/mm3 and
gum bleeding is apparent, a Toothette (Toothette, Sage
Products LLC, Cary, IL) may be used in place of a toothbrush. The patient may not eat or drink for 1 hour following the use of Peridex. Surgilube may be applied to the lips
following each rinse session and every 4 hours for dryness.
Allogeneic and autologous transplant patients are
started on antifungal prophylaxis with fluconazole (5 mg/
kg per day by mouth, maximum dose 200 mg per day).
The condition of the oral cavity should be monitored and
charted on each shift. Doctors should be notified of any
change in the oral cavity from the previous day or shift.
The treatment of mucositis is described in Box 26-1.
Mild mucositis is defined as mild erythema, no mucosal
ulcerations, and no pain; the patient is able to swallow,
and no local analgesia is required. Moderate mucositis is
defined as moderate erythema and multiple mucosal ulcerations with pain that may or may not require analgesics; the patient can swallow but it may be painful. Severe
mucositis is defined as erythema, multiple ulcerations, severe pain requiring analgesia, and difficulty in swallowing
or inability to swallow. Although the regimens shown are
not always successful in cases of moderate or severe mucositis, consistent follow-through minimizes many signs
and symptoms.
The presence of white patches (i.e., candidal infection)
may occur. Care must be taken in obtaining culture specimens and providing specific antifungal therapy.

REMISSION PHASE
During the remission phase of post–bone marrow transplantation therapy, consistent oral hygiene should be
provided by the patient or parent. For the first 90 days,

rinsing with full-strength Peridex, dilute Peridex 1:1 with
sterile water.
CANDIDA INFECTION

•	Contact dentist to examine and obtain a culture specimen. Hold one dose of Peridex and nystatin until culture
is obtained.
•	Patient must be started on additional antifungal therapy
once culture results show evidence of yeast infection.
•	If oral candidiasis is documented by culture, nystatin
should be applied with a Toothette, swished for 30 to
60 seconds, then swallowed.
•	Chart condition of oral cavity; each shift should notify
doctor of any change from the previous day shift.

the dental staff should provide maintenance oral evaluations and preventive oral care reinforcement for the patient during periodic hospital oncologic evaluations.
Afterward, the patient should be referred to his or her
private dentist for continuity of oral health care. If the
patient has no dentist, referral should be made to a dental
diagnostic clinic at the patient’s medical center for dental
health status evaluation and dental care.

SOLID TUMORS
Solid tumors account for approximately half of the cases
of childhood malignancy. The most common tumors include brain tumors, lymphoma, neuroblastoma, Wilms’
tumor, osteosarcoma, and rhabdomyosarcoma. Because
many of the malignancies can involve bone marrow and
their treatment with chemotherapy and radiation can
suppress marrow function, many of the complications
seen in acute leukemia are also seen with these patients.
Bleeding diatheses and the propensity to infection are
the most notable medical complications seen. In general, the dental management of patients with solid tumors
is similar to that of patients with acute leukemia.

REFERENCES
1.	Soucie JM, et al.: Occurrence of hemophilia in the United
States. The Hemophilia Surveillance System Project Investigators, Am J Hematol 59(4):288–294, 1998.
2.	Berntorp E, Shapiro AD: Modern haemophilia care, Lancet
379(9824):1447–1456, 2012.
3.	Peyvandi F, et al.: Rare bleeding disorders, Haemophilia
14(Suppl 3):202–210, 2008.
4.	Duga S, Salomon O: Congenital factor XI deficiency: an update, Semin Thromb Hemost 39(6):621–631, 2013.
5.	Nichols WL, et al.: Von Willebrand disease (VWD): evidencebased diagnosis and management guidelines, the National
Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute (NHLBI) Expert Panel report
(USA), Haemophilia 14(2):171–232, 2008.
6.	Berntorp E, et al.: Third Åland Islands conference on von
Willebrand disease, 26-28 September 2012: meeting report,
Haemophilia 19(Suppl 3):1–18, 2013.

Chapter 26

n

Management of the Medically Compromised Patient: Hematologic Disorders, Cancer, Hepatitis, and AIDS

7.	Berntorp E, et al.: von Willebrand’s disease: a report from a
meeting in the Åland Islands, Haemophilia 18(Suppl 6):1–13,
2012.
8.	Seligsohn U: Treatment of inherited platelet disorders, Haemophilia 18(Suppl 4):161–165, 2012.
9.	Srinivasan K, et al.: Magnetic resonance imaging of mandibular hemophilic pseudotumor associated with factor IX
deficiency: report of case with review of literature, J Oral
Maxillofac Surg 69(6):1683–1690, 2011.
10.	Throndson RR, et al.: Pseudotumor of hemophilia in the
mandible of a patient with hemophilia A, Oral Surg Oral Med
Oral Pathol Oral Radiol 113(2):229–233, 2012.
11.	Sonis AL, Musselman RJ: Oral bleeding in classic hemophilia,
Oral Surg 53:363–366, 1982.
12.	Israels S, et al.: Bleeding disorders: characterization, dental considerations and management, J Can Dent Assoc 72(9):827, 2006.
13.	Escobar MA: Advances in the treatment of inherited coagulation disorders, Haemophilia 19(5):648–659, 2013.
14.	
MASAC Recommendation #218: MASAC recommendation
concerning products for the treatment of hemophilia and other
bleeding disorders; Table 1: Products licensed in the US to treat
hemophilia; http://www.hemophilia.org/NHFWeb/Resource/
StaticPages/menu0/menu5/menu57/masa190tables.pdf
15.	Gupta S, Shapiro AD: New recombinant factor concentrates,
Int Monitor Hemophilia 21:3–8, 2013.
16.	Simpson ML, Valentino LA: Management of joint bleeding
in hemophilia, Expert Rev Haematol 5(4):459–468, 2012.
17.	Gill JC, et al.: Evaluation of high concentration intranasal
and intravenous desmopressin in pediatric patients with
mild hemophilia A or mild-to-moderate type 1 von Willebrand disease, J Pediatr 140(5):595–599, 2001.
18.	Castaman G: Desmopressin for the treatment of haemophilia, Haemophilia 14(Suppl 1):15–20, 2008.
19.	Rodeghiero F, et al.: How to estimate bleeding risk in mild
bleeding disorders, J Thromb Haemost 5(Suppl 1):157–166,
2007.
20.	Björkman S, et al.: Pharmacokinetics of recombinant factor
IX in relation to age of the patient: implications for dosing
in prophylaxis, Haemophilia 7(2):133–139, 2001.
21.	Manco-Johnson MJ, et al.: Prophylaxis versus episodic treatment to prevent joint disease in boys with severe hemophilia, N Engl J Med 357(6):535–544, 2007.
22.	Wilson W, et al.: Prevention of infective endocarditis: guidelines from the American Heart Association: a guideline from
the American Heart Association Rheumatic Fever, Endocarditis, and Kawasaki Disease Committee, Council on Cardiovascular Disease in the Young, and the Council on Clinical
Cardiology, Council on Cardiovascular Surgery and Anesthesia, and the Quality of Care and Outcomes Research Interdisciplinary Working Group, Circulation 116(15):1736–1754,
2007. Erratum in Circulation 116(15):e376–e377, 2007.
23.	Byams VR: Women with bleeding disorders, J Womens Health
16(9):1249–1251, 2007.
24.	Federici AB, Mannucci PM: Management of inherited von
Willebrand disease in 2007, Ann Med 39(5):346–358, 2007.
25.	Plug I, et al.: Bleeding in carriers of hemophilia, Blood
108(1):52–56, 2006.
26.	Street AM, et al.: Management of carriers and babies with
haemophilia, Haemophilia 14(Suppl 3):181–187, 2008.
27.	DiMichele DM: Inhibitor treatment in haemophilias A
and B: inhibitor diagnosis, Haemophilia 12(Suppl 6):37–41,
2006.
28.	Astermark J: Overview of inhibitors, Semin Hematol 43(2 Suppl 4):3–7, 2006.
29.	Mauser-Bunschoten EP, et al.: Co-morbidity in the ageing
haemophilia patient: the down side of increased life expectancy, Haemophilia 15(4):853–863, 2009.

561

30.	Goedert JJ, et al.: Human immunodeficiency and hepatitis virus infections and their associated conditions and
treatments among people with haemophilia, Haemophilia
10(Suppl 4):205–210, 2004.
31.	Evatt BL: The tragic history of AIDS in the hemophilia population, 1982-84, J Thromb Haemost 4(11):2295–2301, 2006.
32.	Wicker S, et al.: Determination of risk of infection with
blood-borne pathogens following a needlestick injury in
hospital workers, Ann Occup Hyg 52(7):615–622, 2008.
33.	MMWR Morbid Mortal Wkly Rep 60(9):273–275, 2011.
34.	Laheij AM, et al.: Healthcare-associated viral and bacterial
infections in dentistry, J Oral Microbiol 4:17659, 2012.
35.	Klein RS, et al.: Occupational risk for hepatitis C virus infection among New York City, Lancet 338:159–142, 1991.
36.	Hughes A, et al.: Adverse incidents resulting in exposure to
body fluids at a UK dental teaching hospital over a 6-year
period, Infect Drug Resist 5:155–161, 2012.
37.	Anderson JA, et al.: Guidance on the dental management of
patients with haemophilia and congenital bleeding disorders, Br Dent J 215(10):497–504, 2013.
38.	Lee AP, et al.: Effectiveness in controlling haemorrhage after dental scaling in people with haemophilia by using
tranexamic acid mouthwash, Br Dent J 198(1):33–38, 2005.
39.	Delati MH, et al.: Bleeding disorders seen in the dental practice, Dent Update 39(4):266–268, 270, 2012.
40.	Azhar S, et al.: Periodontal status and IOTN interventions
among young hemophiliacs, Haemophilia 12(4):4011–4014,
2006. Erratum in Haemophilia 12(5):559, 2006.
41.	Correa ME, et al.: Clinical impact of oral health indexes in
dental extraction of hemophilic patients, J Oral Maxillofac
Surg 64(5):785–788, 2006.
42.	Brewer AK: Advances in minor oral surgery in patients with
congenital bleeding disorders, Haemophilia 14(Suppl 3):
119–121, 2008.
43.	Piot B, et al.: Management of dental extractions in patients
with bleeding disorders, Oral Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol Oral
Radiol Endod 93(3):247–250, 2002.
44.	Reich W, et al.: Bleeding complications after oral surgery in
outpatients with compromised haemostasis: incidence and
management, Oral Maxillofac Surg 13(2):73–77, 2009.
45.	American Dental Association: American Academy of Orthopedic Surgeons: Antibiotic prophylaxis for dental patients with
total joint replacements, J Am Dent Assoc 134:895–898, 2003.
46.	Olsen I, et al.: Should patients with hip joint prosthesis receive antibiotic prophylaxis before dental treatment? J Oral
Microbiol 2:5265, 2010.
47.	Lockhart PB, et al.: Acceptance among and impact on dental
practitioners and patients of American Heart Association recommendations for antibiotic prophylaxis, J Am Dent Assoc
144(9):1030–1035, 2013.
48.	Araujo MW, Andreana S: Risk and prevention of transmission of infectious diseases in dentistry, Quintessence Int
33(5):376–382, 2002.
49.	http://www.cdc.gov/hepatitis/Statistics/index.htm (accessed
06/06/2014).
50.	Razavi H, et al.: Chronic hepatitis C virus (HCV) disease burden and cost in the United States, Hepatology 57(6):2164–2170,
2013.
51.	http://hcvguidelines.org/ (accessed 06/06/2014).
52.	Centers for Disease Control and Prevention: Viral hepatitis.
Available at: http://www.cdc.gov/ncidod/diseases/hepatitis/
c/fact.htm (accessed 06/06/2014).
53.	Herrera JL: Hepatitis E as a cause of acute non-A, non-B hepatitis, Arch Intern Med 153(6):773–775, 1993.
54.	Borkakoti J, et al.: Does high viral load of hepatitis E virus influence the severity and prognosis of acute liver failure during pregnancy? J Med Virol 85(4):620–626, 2013.

562

Chapter 26

n

Management of the Medically Compromised Patient: Hematologic Disorders, Cancer, Hepatitis, and AIDS

55.	da Fonseca MA: Dental and oral care for chronically ill
children and adolescents, General Dent 58(3):204–207,
2010.
56.	Alves AC, et al.: Malocclusion and treatment in children
and adolescents with sickle cell disease, Angle Orthod Vol.
84(3):467–472, 2014.
57.	http://www.cdc.gov/hiv/statistics/basics/ataglane.html (accessed 06/06/2014).
58.	http://www.cdc.gov/hiv/pdf/statistics 2011_HIV_Surveillance_
Report_vol_23.pdf.
59.	Panel on Antiretroviral Guidelines for Adults and Adolescents: Guidelines for the use of antiretroviral agents in HIV1-infected adults and adolescents. Department of Health and
Human Services. Available at http://aidsinfo.nih.gov/con
tentfiles/Ivguidelines/AdultandAdolescentGI.pdf. (accessed
06/06/2014).
60.	Fox JE, et al.: Increasing access to oral health care for people
living with HIV/AIDS in the U.S: baseline evaluation results
of the Innovations in Oral Health Care Initiative, Public
Health Rep 127(Suppl 2):5–16, 2012.
61.	Lacovou E, et al.: Diagnosis and treatment of HIV-associated
manifestations in otolaryngology, Infect Dis Rep 4(1):e9,
2012.
62.	Reznik DA: Oral manifestations of HIV disease, Top HIV Med
13(5):143–148, 2005 Dec-2006 Jan.
63.	Pindborg JJ: Oral candidiasis in HIV infection. In Robertson
PB, Greenspan JS, editors: Perspectives on oral manifestations of
AIDS. Diagnosis and management of HIV-associated infections,
Littleton, MA, 1988, PSG Publishing.
64.	Patton LL: Oral lesions associated with human immunodeficiency virus disease, Dent Clin N Am 57:673–698,
2013.

65.	Greenspan D: Oral manifestations of HIV infection. In Robertson PB, Greenspan JS, editors: Perspectives on oral manifestations
of AIDS. Diagnosis and management of HIV-associated infections,
Littleton, MA, 1988, PSG Publishing.
66.	Silverman S, AIDS: HIV infection and dentistry. Part I: Epidemiology, pathogenesis and transmission. Part II: Oral manifestations, diagnosis and management. In Fairfax (VA), California,
and American Dental Institutes for Continuing Education, Vol 7.
1991.
67.	Howlader N, et al. editors: SEER Cancer Statistics Review,
1975-2011, National Cancer Institute, Bethesda, MD, http://
seer.cancer.gov.csr/1975_2011/, (based on November 2013
SEER data submission, posted to the SEER website, April 2014.
68.	Schultz KR, et al.: Risk- and response-based classification of
childhood B-precursor acute lymphoblastic leukemia: a combined analysis of prognostic markers from the Pediatric Oncology Group (POG) and Children’s Cancer Group (CCG),
Blood 109:926–935, 2007.
69.	Borowitz MJ, et al.: Clinical significance of minimal residual
disease in childhood acute lymphoblastic leukemia and its
relationship to other prognostic factors: a Children’s Oncology Group Study, Blood 111(12), June 15, 2008.
70.	Meschinchi S, Arceci RJ: Prognostic factors and risk-based
therapy in acute myeloid leukemia, Oncologist 12:341–355,
2007.
71.	McGuire DB, et al.: Systemic review of basic oral care for the
management of oral mucositis in cancer patients, Support
Care Cancer 21:3165–3177, 2013.
72.	Saunders DP, et al.: Systematic review of antimicrobials, mucosal coating agents, anesthetics, and analgesics for the management of oral mucositis in cancer patients, Support Care
Cancer 21:3191–3207, 2013.

CHAPTER

27

Management of Trauma to the
Teeth and Supporting Tissues
s James E. Jones, Kenneth J. Spolnik, and Ghaeth H. Yassen

For additional resources, please visit the

website.

CHAPTER OUTLINE
HISTORY AND EXAMINATION
History of the Injury
Clinical Examination
Radiographic Examination
EMERGENCY TREATMENT OF
SOFT-TISSUE INJURY
EMERGENCY TREATMENT AND
TEMPORARY RESTORATION OF
FRACTURED TEETH WITHOUT
PULP EXPOSURE
Fragment Restoration (Reattachment
of Tooth Fragment)
Temporary Bonded Resin
Restoration
TREATMENT OF VITAL PULP
EXPOSURES
Direct Pulp Cap
Pulpotomy
Pulpectomy with Endodontic
Treatment

I

THERAPY TO STIMULATE ROOT
GROWTH AND APICAL REPAIR IN
IMMATURE TEETH WITH PULPAL
NECROSIS
Apexification
Regenerative Endodontic Procedures
REACTION OF THE TOOTH TO
TRAUMA
Pulpal Hyperemia
Internal Hemorrhage
Calcific Metamorphosis of the
Dental Pulp (Progressive Canal
Calcification or Dystrophic
Calcification)
Internal Resorption
Peripheral (External) Root Resorption
Pulpal Necrosis
Ankylosis
RESTORATION OF FRACTURED
TEETH

njuries to the teeth of children or adults present
unique problems in diagnosis and treatment. The
diagnosis of the extent of the injury after a blow to
a tooth, regardless of loss of tooth structure, is difficult
and often inconclusive. Trauma to a tooth is invariably
followed by pulpal hyperemia, the extent of which cannot always be determined by available diagnostic methods. Congestion and alteration in the blood flow in the
pulp may be sufficient to initiate irreversible degenerative changes which, over time, can cause pulpal necrosis.
In addition, the apical vessels may have been severed or
damaged enough to interfere with the normal reparative
process. Treatment of injuries causing pulp exposure or
tooth displacement is particularly challenging because
the prognosis of the involved tooth is often uncertain.
The treatment of fractured teeth, particularly in young
patients, is further complicated by the often difficult but
extremely important restorative procedure. Although the
dentist may prefer to delay the restoration because of a
questionable prognosis for the pulp, often a malocclusion
can develop within a matter of days as a result of a break
in the normal proximal contact with adjacent teeth. Adjacent teeth may tip into the area created by the loss of
tooth structure. This loss of space will create a problem
when the final restoration is contemplated. There must
often be a compromise of an ideal aesthetic appearance,

Aesthetic Bonded Composite Resin
Restoration
REACTION OF PERMANENT TOOTH
BUDS TO INJURY
Hypocalcification and Hypoplasia
Reparative Dentin Production
Dilaceration
DISPLACEMENT OF PRIMARY AND
PERMANENT ANTERIOR TEETH
(LUXATION)
Intrusion and Extrusion of Teeth
Avulsion and Replantation
Management of Root Fractures
Other Displacement Injuries of Teeth
Requiring Stabilization
MANAGEMENT OF ORAL BURNS
Nature of the Injury
Treatment
TRAUMA PREVENTION

at least in the initial restoration, because the prognosis
is questionable or because the tooth is young and has a
large pulp or is still in the stage of active eruption.
The likelihood of success often depends on the rapidity
with which the tooth is treated after the injury, regardless of
whether the procedure involves protecting a large area of exposed dentin or treating a vital pulp exposure. Several factors
can be considered common to all types of injury to the anterior teeth. These important considerations should become a
checklist that is used consistently by the dentist in the diagnosis of and treatment planning for traumatic injuries.
The International Association of Dental Traumatology reports that one of every two children sustains a
dental injury, most often between the ages of 8 and 12
years. They suggest that, in most cases of dental trauma,
a rapid and appropriate treatment can lessen its impact
from both an oral and an aesthetic standpoint. To that
end the association has developed guidelines for the
evaluation and management of traumatic dental injuries
(http://www.iadt-dentaltrauma.org/).

HISTORY AND EXAMINATION
The routine use of a clinical evaluation sheet for injured
anterior teeth is helpful during the initial examination and
subsequent examinations of an injured tooth (Fig. 27-1). The
563

564

Chapter 27

Management of Trauma to the Teeth and Supporting Tissues

n

ASSESSMENT OF
ACUTE TRAUMATIC
INJURIES
DATE:

TIME:

PATIENT
NAME:
DATE OF BIRTH:
REFERRED BY:

MEDICAL HISTORY:
ALLERGIES:

DATE OF LAST TETANUS INNOCULATON:

DATE AND TIME OF INJURY:

TIME LAPSED SINCE INJURY:

WHERE INJURY OCCURRED:

INTRAORAL EXAMINATION

EXTRAORAL EXAM

HISTORY

HOW INJURY OCCURRED:
Check if present and describe
Nondental injuries
Loss of consciousness
Altered orientation/mental status
Hemorrhage from nose/ears
Headache/nausea/vomiting
Neck pain
Spontaneous dental pain
Pain on mastication
Reaction to thermal changes
Previous dental trauma
Other complaints

MANAGEMENT PRIOR TO EXAM
By whom:
Describe:

Check if present and describe
Facial fractures
Lacerations
Contusions
Swelling
Abrasions
Hemorrhage/drainage
Foreign bodies
TMJ deviation/asymmetry

OTHER FINDINGS/COMMENTS:

Check if injured and describe
Lips
Frenae
Buccal mucosa
Gingivae
Palate
Tongue
Floor of mouth
Occlusion
Molar classification
R___ L___
Canine classification R___ L___
Overbite (%)_______
Overjet (mm)_______
Crossbite
Y N
Midline deviation Y N
Interferences
Y N

DIAGRAM OF INJURIES

Figure 27-1 Assessment of acute traumatic injuries. (Adapted from American Academy of Pediatric Dentistry, Pediatr Dent 24
(7 suppl): 95-96, 2002.)

Chapter 27

n

Management of Trauma to the Teeth and Supporting Tissues

TOOTH NUMBER

DENTAL INJURIES

AVULSION

Extraoral time
Storage medium

INFRACTION
CROWN FRACTURE
PULP EXPOSURE

Size
Appearance

COLOR
MOBILITY (mm)
PERCUSSION
LUXATION

Direction
Extent
Electric
Thermal

PULP TESTING

PULP SIZE
ROOT DEVELOPMENT
ROOT FRACTURE
PERIODONTAL LIGAMENT SPACE
PERIAPICAL PATHOLOGY
ALVEOLAR FRACTURE
FOREIGN BODY
DEVELOPMENTAL ANOMALY
OTHER
Check if performed and describe
Soft-tissue management
Medication
Pulp therapy
Repositioning
Stabilization
Restoration
Extraction
Prescription
Referral
Other

INSTRUCTIONS AND DISPOSITION

TREATMENT

RADIOGRAPHS

CARIES/PREVIOUS RESTORATIONS

SUMMARY

Subsequent visit No. 1

Check if discussed
Diet
Hygiene
Pain
Swelling
Infection
Prescription
Complications:
Damage to developing teeth
Abnormal position/ankylosis
Tooth loss
Pulp damage to injured teeth
Other:
Follow-up:
Other
Subsequent visit No. 3

Date___________
7 8

9 10

 
1. Pulpal response
2. Radiographic exam    
2625 24 23
3. Treatment and comments:
Subsequent visit No. 2
1. Pulpal response

9 10

 
1. Pulpal response
2. Radiographic exam    
2625 24 23
3. Treatment and comments:

Date___________
7 8

Date___________
7 8

Subsequent visit No. 4

9 10

Date___________
7 8

 
2. Radiographic exam    

1. Pulpal response

3. Treatment and comments:

3. Treatment and comments:

9 10

 
2. Radiographic exam    

2625 24 23

2625 24 23

Figure 27-1, cont’d

565

566

Chapter 27

n

Management of Trauma to the Teeth and Supporting Tissues

form, which becomes a part of the patient’s record, serves as
a checklist of important questions that must be asked and
observations that must be made by the dentist and the auxiliary personnel during the examination of the child.

HISTORY OF THE INJURY
The time of the injury should first be established. Unfortunately, many patients do not seek professional advice
and treatment immediately after an injury. Occasionally
the accident is so severe that dental treatment cannot be
started immediately because other injuries have higher
priority. Davis and Vogel emphasized that a force strong
enough to fracture, intrude, or avulse a tooth is also strong
enough to result in cervical spine or intracranial injury.
The dentist must be particularly alert to such potential
problems, be prepared ahead of time to make a neurologic
assessment, and make appropriate medical referral when
indicated without delay.1 The patient should be assessed
for nausea, vomiting, drowsiness, or possible cerebral spinal fluid leakage from the nose and ears, which would
indicate a skull fracture. In addition, the patient should
be evaluated for lacerations and facial bone fractures. Obtaining a baseline temperature, pulse, blood pressure, and
respiratory rate should be considered as information to
be gathered before addressing the dental needs of the patient. Finally, Davis2 recommends a quick cranial nerve
evaluation involving the following four areas:
  
1.	Extraocular muscles are intact and functioning appropriately; that is, the patient can track a finger moving
vertically and horizontally through the visual field
with the eyes remaining in tandem.
2.	Pupils are equal, round, and reactive to light with accommodation.
3.	Sensory function is normal as measured through light
touch to various areas of the face.
4.	Symmetry of motor function is present, as assessed
by having the patient frown, smile, move the tongue,
and perform several voluntary muscular movements.
  
The prognosis of an injured tooth depends logically, often to a great extent, on the time that has elapsed between
the occurrence of the accident and the initiation of emergency treatment. This is particularly true in cases of pulp
exposure, for which pulp capping or pulpotomy would be
the procedure of choice. Rusmah treated 123 traumatized
permanent incisors and monitored them over a 24-month
period. His findings suggest that the interval between
trauma and emergency treatment is directly related to the
severity of the injury and the dental awareness of the patients.3 Furthermore, the prognosis of the injured teeth
maintaining pulp vitality diminished when treatment was
delayed. The loss of vitality of some injured teeth occurred
as early as 3 months and as late as 24 months after the
injury, which justifies a long follow-up period after injury.
For practical and especially economic reasons, Andreasen and colleagues have attempted to classify pulpal
and periodontal healing of traumatic dental injuries based
on the effect of treatment delay.4 They developed three
major categories of treatment timing: acute treatment
(i.e., within a few hours), subacute treatment (i.e., within
the first 24 hours), and delayed treatment (i.e., after the
first 24 hours). Unfortunately, there is limited knowledge

available in the literature of the effect of treatment delay
on wound healing.
Taking a complete dental history can help the dentist
learn of previous injuries to the teeth in the area. Repeated injuries to the teeth are not uncommon in children
with protruding anterior teeth and in those who are active in athletics. In these patients the prognosis may be
less favorable. The dentist must rule out the possibility of
a degenerative pulp or adverse reaction of the supporting
tissues as a result of previous trauma.
The patient’s complaints and experiences after the injury are often valuable in determining the extent of the
injury and in estimating the ability of the injured pulp and
supporting tissues to overcome the effects of the injury.
Pain caused by thermal change is indicative of significant
pulpal inflammation. Pain occurring when the teeth are
brought into normal occlusion may indicate that the tooth
has been displaced. Such pain could likewise indicate an
injury to the periodontal and supporting tissues. The likelihood of eventual pulpal necrosis increases if the tooth is
mobile at the time of the first examination. The greater the
mobility, the greater the chance of pulpal death.
Trauma to the supporting tissues may cause sufficient
inflammation to initiate external root resorption. In instances of severe injury, teeth can be lost as a result of
pathologic root resorption and pulpal degeneration.

CLINICAL EXAMINATION
The clinical examination should be conducted after the
teeth in the area of injury have been carefully cleaned of
debris. When the injury has resulted in a fracture of the
crown, the dentist should observe the amount of tooth
structure that has been lost and should look for evidence
of pulp exposure. With the aid of a good light, the dentist
should carefully examine the clinical crown for cracks and
craze lines, the presence of which could influence the type
of permanent restoration used for the tooth. With light
transmitted through the teeth in the area, the color of the
injured tooth should be carefully compared with that of adjacent uninjured teeth. Severely traumatized teeth often appear darker and reddish, although not actually discolored,
which indicates pulpal hyperemia (Fig. 27-2). This appearance suggests that at some later time the pulp may undergo
degenerative change, terminating in pulpal necrosis.
Diangelis and colleagues have advocated the following
classification of crown fractures in describing the extent
of damage to the crown of the tooth5:
Crown fracture–uncomplicated: an enamel fracture or
an enamel-dentin fracture that does not involve the pulp.
Crown fracture–complicated: an enamel-dentin fracture with pulp exposure.
A vitality test of the injured tooth should be performed,
and the teeth in the immediate area, as well as those in
the opposing arch, should be tested. The best prediction
of continued vitality of the pulp of a damaged or traumatized tooth is the vital response to electric pulp testing at
the time of the initial examination. A negative response,
however, is not a reliable evidence of pulp death because
some teeth that give such a response soon after the injury
may recover vitality after a time. When the electric pulp
tester is used, the dentist should first determine the ­normal

Chapter 27

n

Management of Trauma to the Teeth and Supporting Tissues

567

Figure 27-2 The reddish appearance of the exposed dentin

is evidence of severe hyperemia within the pulp tissue. The
prognosis for retaining vitality of the pulp is poor.

reading by testing an uninjured tooth on the o
­ pposite side
of the mouth and recording the lowest number at which
the tooth responds. If the injured tooth requires more
current than does a normal tooth, the pulp may be undergoing degenerative change, whereas if it required less
current, pulpal inflammation is usually indicated.
Many practitioners question the need for the electric
vitality test immediately after the injury. Because the electrical stimulus has been shown to produce negligible additional pulpal irritation, its use is not contraindicated on this
basis. However, the patient’s measured responses to the test
may be almost meaningless. The reliability of the electric
pulp test depends on eliciting valid responses from the patient. The mere presence of this new, unknown instrument
may create anxiety in children that hampers their ability
to respond accurately to the test. Because an unscheduled
emergency appointment for treatment of an injury is a new
experience, it seems reasonable to introduce the child to
the instrument during the first emergency visit, when the
child does not know what to expect. This gives the dentist
an opportunity to allay the child’s anxiety about the instrument during a time when the responses are not as important as they will be on subsequent visits. Furthermore, the
electric pulp test is frequently unreliable, even on normal
teeth when apices are incompletely formed.
The thermal test is also somewhat helpful in determining the degree of pulpal damage after trauma. Although
there are difficulties with the thermal test, it is probably
more reliable than the electric pulp test in testing primary
incisors in young children. Failure of a tooth to respond to
heat indicates pulpal necrosis. The response of a tooth to a
lower degree of heat than is necessary to elicit a response in
adjacent teeth is an indication of inflammation. Pain occurring when ice is applied to a normal tooth will subside
when the ice is removed. A more painful and often lingering reaction to cold indicates a pathologic change within
the pulp, the nature of which can be determined when the
reaction is correlated with other clinical observations.
Failure of a recently traumatized tooth to respond to the
pulp test is not uncommon and may indicate a previous

A

B
Figure 27-3 A, Radiograph of fractured teeth. B, Radio-

graph with a reduced exposure time (25% of the usual
time) was useful for detection of the location of this fractured tooth fragment within the patient’s lip.

injury with a resulting necrotic pulp. However, the traumatized tooth may be in a state of shock and as a r­ esult may
fail to respond to the accepted methods of d
­ etermining
pulp vitality. The failure of a pulp to respond immediately
after an accident is not an indication for endodontic therapy. Instead, emergency treatment should be completed,
and the tooth should be retested at the next follow-up visit.

RADIOGRAPHIC EXAMINATION
The examination of traumatized teeth cannot be considered complete without a radiograph of the injured tooth,
the adjacent teeth, and sometimes the teeth in the opposing arch. In search of a fractured tooth fragment, it may
even be necessary to obtain a radiograph of the soft tissue

568

Chapter 27

n

Management of Trauma to the Teeth and Supporting Tissues

surrounding the injury site (Fig. 27-3). The relative sizes
of the pulp chamber and canal should be carefully examined. Irregularities or an inconsistency in the size of the
chamber or canal compared with that of adjacent teeth
may be evidence of a previous injury. This observation is
important in determining the immediate course of treatment. In young patients, the stage of apical development
often indicates the type of treatment, just as the size of
the coronal pulp and its proximity to the area of fracture
influence the type of restoration that can be used. A root
fracture as a result of the injury or one previously sustained can be detected by a careful examination of the
radiograph. However, the presence of a root fracture may
not influence the course of treatment, particularly if the
fracture line is in the region of the apical third. Teeth with
root fractures in this area rarely need stabilization, and
a fibrous or calcified union usually results. If teeth have
been discernibly dislocated, with or without root fracture,
two or three radiographs of the area at different angles
may be needed to clearly define the defect and aid the
dentist in deciding on a course of treatment.
Another value of the radiograph is that it provides a record of the tooth immediately after the injury. Frequent,
periodic radiographs reveal evidence of continued pulp
vitality or adverse changes that take place within the pulp
or the supporting tissues. In young teeth in which the
pulp recovers from the initial trauma, the pulp chamber
and canal decrease in size coincident with the normal
formation of secondary dentin. After a period of time
­
an inconsistency in the true size or contour of the pulp
chamber or canal compared with that of adjacent teeth
may indicate a developing pathologic condition.
When more complex facial injuries have occurred
or jaw fractures are suspected, extraoral films may also
be necessary to identify the extent and location of all
injury sequelae. Oblique lateral jaw radiographs and
panoramic films are often useful adjuncts to this diagnostic process.

EMERGENCY TREATMENT OF
SOFT-TISSUE INJURY
Injury to the teeth of children is often accompanied by
open wounds of the oral tissues, abrasion of the facial tissues, or even puncture wounds. The dentist must ­recognize
the possibility of the development of tetanus after the injury and must carry out adequate first-aid measures.
Children with up-to-date active immunization are protected by the level of antibodies in their circulation, produced by a series of injections of tetanus toxoid. Primary
immunization is usually a part of medical care during the
first 2 years of life. However, primary immunization cannot be assumed—it must be confirmed by examination of
the child’s medical record.
When the child who has had primary immunization
receives an injury from an object that is likely to have
been contaminated, the antibody-forming mechanism
may be activated with a booster injection of toxoid. An
unimmunized child can be protected through passive
immunization or serotherapy with tetanus antitoxin (tetanus immune globulin, or TIG).

The dentist examining the child after an injury should
determine the child’s immunization status, carry out adequate debridement of the wound, and, when indicated, refer the child to the family physician. Tetanus is often fatal,
and preventive measures must be taken if there is a possibility that an injured child is not adequately immunized.
Debridement, suturing, and/or hemorrhage control of
open soft-tissue wounds should be carried out as indicated. Working with an oral and maxillofacial surgeon or a
plastic surgeon may also be indicated.

EMERGENCY TREATMENT AND
TEMPORARY RESTORATION OF
FRACTURED TEETH WITHOUT PULP
EXPOSURE
A trauma to a tooth that causes a loss of only a small portion
of enamel should be treated as carefully as one in which
greater tooth structure is lost. The emergency treatment
of minor injuries in which only the enamel is fractured
may consist of no more than smoothing the rough, jagged
tooth structure. However, without exception, a thorough
examination should be conducted as previously described.
The patient should be reexamined at 2 weeks and again
at 1 month after the injury. If the tooth appears to have
recovered at that time, continued observation at the patient’s regular recall appointments should be the rule.
Sudden injuries with a resultant extensive loss of tooth
structure and exposed dentin require an immediate temporary restoration or protective covering, in addition to
the complete diagnostic procedure. In this type of injury,
initial pulpal hyperemia and the possibility of further
trauma to the pulp by pressure or by thermal or chemical
irritants must be reduced. In addition, if normal contact
with adjacent or opposing teeth has been lost, temporary restoration or protective covering can be designed
to maintain the arch integrity. Because providing an adequate permanent restoration may depend on maintaining
the normal alignment and position of teeth in the area,
this part of the treatment is as important as maintaining
the vitality of the teeth. Several restorations that will satisfy these requirements can easily be fabricated.

FRAGMENT RESTORATION (REATTACHMENT
OF TOOTH FRAGMENT)
Occasionally the dentist may have the opportunity to reattach the fragment of a fractured tooth using resin and
bonding techniques. Successful reattachment of tooth
fragments has been reported to be stable and is an option
to be considered by the dentist.6,7
This procedure is atraumatic and seems to be the ideal
method of restoring the fractured crown. Sealing the injured tooth and aesthetically restoring its natural contour
and color are accomplished simply and constitute an excellent service to the patient. The procedure provides an
essentially perfect temporary restoration that may be retained a long time in some cases.
It is not often that the fractured tooth fragment remains
intact and is recovered after an injury, but when this happens, the dentist may consider the reattachment procedure.
The tooth requires no mechanical preparation because

Chapter 27

retention is provided by enamel etching and bonding techniques. If little or no dentin is exposed, the fragment and
the fractured tooth enamel are etched and reattached with
bonding agents and materials. Farik and colleagues have
tested the use of the new single-bottle dentin adhesives
with and without unfilled resins in the fragment-bonding
technique.8 Their hypothesis was that the amount of resin
in single-bottle dentin adhesives might not be sufficient
to secure an adequate fragment bond. The results of their
study showed that all but one of the seven dentin adhesive
systems tested should be used with an additional unfilled
resin when fractured teeth are restored by reattachment.
For cases in which considerable dentin is exposed or a
direct pulp cap is indicated, some controversy exists about
the best treatment to enhance the likelihood of maintaining pulp vitality. Some believe that the meticulous use
of bonding agents and materials to directly cap the exposed dentin and the pulp, if exposed, (i.e., the total-etch
technique) is best, whereas others believe that calcium hydroxide should be applied to the exposed dentin and pulp
before the bonding procedure is completed.
Figure 27-4 illustrates the successful management of an
uncomplicated fracture of the maxillary right central incisor in a 6-year-old boy who was treated approximately 1
hour after the injury. After the fragment was trial-seated
to confirm a precise fit, the exposed dentin of the fractured tooth was covered with a thin layer of hard-setting
calcium hydroxide that was allowed to remain as a sedative dressing between the tooth and restored fragment.
A portion of the dentin in the fragment was removed to
provide space for the calcium hydroxide. The fragment
was then soaked in etchant, and the fractured area of
the tooth was also etched well beyond the fracture site.
After thorough rinsing and drying of all etched enamel,
the fragment and the etched portion of the tooth were
painted with a light-curing sealant material. Although
no bonding agent was used here, its use is currently recommended. The selected shade of composite resin was
used to fill the prepared void in the fragment, and it was
then carefully seated into its correct position and held
firmly while the material was light-cured. Subsequent radiographs and vitality tests indicated that the tooth had
probably responded favorably. Kanca reported reattachment of a fragment that successfully capped the pulp using the total-etch technique.9 The restoration was more
than 5 years old (replaced once) and was still in place at
the time of the report.
Ludlow and LaTurno have reported the success of a
fragment restoration for a 13-year-old patient in whom
essentially the entire clinical crown of a maxillary incisor was fractured away (class IV fracture).10 The remaining
tooth was first treated with a root canal filling, and then
the pulp canal of the tooth and the enlarged pulp chamber in the fragment crown were used as retentive internal
cavities to strengthen the reattached crown.

TEMPORARY BONDED RESIN RESTORATION
The excellent marginal seal and retention derived from
the application of aesthetic restorative materials to etched
enamel surfaces have revolutionized the approach to the
restoration of fractured anterior teeth. These bonding

n

Management of Trauma to the Teeth and Supporting Tissues

569

techniques are highly successful and versatile in many
situations involving anterior trauma.
It may not be advisable to restore an extensive crown
fracture with a finished aesthetic resin restoration on the
day of the injury because it is usually best not to manipulate the tooth more than is absolutely necessary to
make a diagnosis and provide emergency treatment. Also,
such emergencies are usually treated at unscheduled appointments, and this treatment should be carried out as
efficiently as possible to prevent significant disruption of
the dentist’s scheduled appointments. A temporary restorative resin restoration can be placed efficiently and is
often the treatment of choice.
Conventional bonding procedures are used for application of the restorative resin material as a protective covering
at the fracture site. As a short-term temporary restoration,
it requires little or no finishing and does not need to restore the tooth to normal contour. However, the restoration should cover the fractured surfaces and maintain any
natural proximal contacts the patient may have had before
the injury (Fig. 27-5). After an adequate recovery period an
aesthetic resin restoration may be completed, often without removal of all the temporary resin material. However,
the outer surfaces of the temporary restoration should be
removed superficially before the new material is applied.
The margins of the new restoration should extend beyond
the margins of the temporary restoration and onto newly
etched enamel. The aesthetic bonded resin restoration is
discussed and illustrated later in this chapter.

TREATMENT OF VITAL PULP EXPOSURES
Injury resulting in an exposure of the pulp in young patients often presents a challenge in diagnosis and treatment even greater than that of a pulp exposed by caries.
In addition to treating the pulp at the exposure site, the
dentist must keep in mind that, as a result of the blow, conditions may be present for many unpredictable reactions in
the pulp or supporting tissues. The immediate objective in
treatment, however, should be the selection of a procedure
designed to maintain the vitality of the pulp whenever possible. In the management of vital pulp exposure, at least
three choices of treatment are available: direct pulp cap,
pulpotomy, and pulpectomy with endodontic therapy.

DIRECT PULP CAP
If the patient is seen within an hour or two after the injury, if the vital exposure is small, and if sufficient crown
remains to retain a temporary restoration to support the
capping material and prevent the ingress of oral fluids,
the treatment of choice is direct pulp capping (Fig. 27-6).
If the final restoration of the tooth will require the use
of the pulp chamber or pulp canal for retention, a pulpotomy or a pulpectomy is the treatment of choice.
Even though the pulp at the exposure site has been exposed to oral fluids for a period of time, the tooth should
be isolated with a rubber dam, and the treatment procedure should be completed in a surgically clean environment. The healthy pulp may survive and repair small injuries even in the presence of a few bacteria, the same as
any other connective tissue. The crown and the area of

570

Chapter 27

n

Management of Trauma to the Teeth and Supporting Tissues

A

B

D

C

F

E

Figure 27-4 A, Significant uncomplicated fracture (not

G

involving the dental pulp) of a maxillary right central incisor. B, The exposed dentin was closely examined to ensure
that no exposure of the pulp was present. Next, all exposed
dentin was covered with hard-setting calcium hydroxide; all
fractured enamel remained exposed. C, Radiograph of fractured incisor demonstrating stage of root-end development
and the absence of root fracture. D, Fractured part of central incisor. Part of the dentin was removed from the tooth
fragment; the enamel was not disturbed. E, Facial review of
restored tooth 12 months after injury. F, ­Incisal view of the
restored tooth 12 months after injury. G, ­Radiograph of the
restored tooth 12 months after injury.

Chapter 27

n

Management of Trauma to the Teeth and Supporting Tissues

571

A

B

C

D

E

F

G
Figure 27-5 A, Uncomplicated crown fracture (not involving the dental pulp) of maxillary right central incisor and of the

maxillary left central incisor. B, Radiograph obtained after the traumatic incident. C, Maxillary occlusal view of traumatized
central incisors. The maxillary left central incisor has been minimally prepared for a temporary restoration. Note that no pulpal
exposure is evident. D, Calcium hydroxide has been applied, covering all exposed dentin. E, Etchant is being applied, per
manufacturer’s instructions, to the involved teeth. F, Involved teeth after the etching process. Note the etched “snow-capped”
appearance of the enamel. G, Involved teeth after application of the temporary restoration. The occlusion has been checked
to make sure that there is no contact with the opposing dentition. After an appropriate amount of observation time, a more
aesthetic restoration will be completed.

572

Chapter 27

n

Management of Trauma to the Teeth and Supporting Tissues

Figure 27-6 Complicated crown fracture (involving the

dental pulp) to a permanent central incisor. A small pulp
exposure is evident that should be capped and protected
with a bonded restoration.
the actual exposure should be washed free of debris, and
the pulp should be kept moist before the placement of the
pulp-capping material.
As mentioned in Chapter 13, numerous pulp-capping
materials have been studied. Pulp capping with conventional bonding materials is now accepted by many, although the procedure is also considered inadvisable by
others. Reports of the use of both mineral trioxide aggregate (MTA) and bone morphogenetic proteins are significant not only for pulp capping but also for general use in
endodontic therapy for vital and nonvital teeth.
The prime requisite of pulpal healing is an adequate
seal against oral fluids. Therefore a restoration should be
placed immediately to protect the pulp-capping material
until the healing process is well advanced. A thin layer of
dentin-like material should cover the vital pulp tissue in
at least 2 months.
If the injured tooth presents a good indication for direct pulp capping, there is a definite advantage in providing this treatment. The pulp will remain functional and
reparative, and dentin will develop and allow the tooth to
be restored without loss of normal pulp vitality.

PULPOTOMY
If the pulp exposure in a traumatized, immature permanent (open apex) tooth is large, if even a small pulp exposure exists and the patient did not seek treatment until
several hours or days after the injury, or if there is insufficient crown remaining to hold a temporary restoration,
the immediate treatment of choice is a shallow pulpotomy or a conventional pulpotomy (Fig. 27-7). A shallow or
partial pulpotomy is preferable if coronal pulp inflammation is not widespread and if a deeper access opening is
not needed to help retain the coronal restoration.11 Pulpotomy is also indicated for immature permanent teeth if
necrotic pulp tissue is evident at the exposure site with
inflammation of the underlying coronal tissue, but a conventional or cervical pulpotomy would be required. Yet
another indication is trauma to a more mature permanent
(closed apex) tooth that has caused both a pulp exposure
and a root fracture. In addition, a shallow pulpotomy
may be the treatment of choice for a complicated fracture

of a tooth with a closed apex when definitive treatment
can be provided soon after the injury (Fig. 27-8).
The exposure site should be conservatively enlarged, and
1 to 2 mm of coronal pulp tissue should be removed for the
shallow pulpotomy or all pulp tissue in the pulp chamber
should be removed for the conventional pulpotomy. When
pulp amputation has been completed to the desired level,
the pulp chamber should be thoroughly cleaned with copious irrigation. No visible dentin chips or pulp tissue tags
should remain. If the remaining pulp is healthy, hemorrhage will be easy to control with a pledget of moist cotton
lightly compressed against the tissue. The pulp should also
have a bright reddish-pink color and a concave contour
(meniscus). A deeper amputation may be necessary if the
health of the pulp is questionable. A dressing of calcium
hydroxide is gently applied to the vital pulp tissue so that
it is in passive contact with the pulp. The remaining access
opening is filled with a hard-setting, biocompatible material with excellent marginal sealing capability. The crown
may then be restored with a separate bonding procedure.
Some experts on pulp therapy recommend conventional pulpectomy and root canal fillings for all teeth treated
with calcium hydroxide pulpotomies soon after the root
apices close. They view the calcium hydroxide pulpotomy
as an interim procedure performed solely to achieve normal root development and apical closure. They justify the
pulpectomy and root canal filling after apical closure as
necessary to prevent an exaggerated calcific response that
may result in total obliteration of the root canal (calcific
metamorphosis or calcific degeneration).
We have observed this calcific degenerative response
and agree that it should be intercepted with root canal
therapy if possible after apical closure. However, longterm successes can be achieved after calcium hydroxide
pulpotomy in which no calcific metamorphosis has been
observed. If healthy pulp tissue remains in the root canal, if the coronal pulp tissue is cleanly excised without
excessive tissue laceration and tearing, if the calcium
hydroxide is placed gently on the pulp tissue at the amputation site without undue pressure, and if the tooth is
adequately sealed, there is a high probability that longterm success can be achieved without follow-up root canal therapy.12,13

PULPECTOMY WITH ENDODONTIC TREATMENT
One of the most challenging endodontic procedures is
the treatment and subsequent filling of the root canal of a
tooth with an open apex. The lumen of the root canal of
such an immature tooth is largest at the apex and smallest
in the cervical area and is often referred to as a blunderbuss
canal. Hermetic sealing of the apex with conventional
endodontic techniques is usually impossible without apical surgery. This surgical procedure is traumatic for the
young child and should be avoided if possible.
In instances of complicated fractures of young permanent teeth with incomplete root growth and a vital
pulp, the pulpotomy technique (as just described) is the
procedure of choice. The successful pulpotomy allows the
pulp in the root canal to maintain its vitality and also
allows the apical portion to continue to develop (apexogenesis). For complicated fractures, the eventual restoration may require a post in the root canal. Before this type

Chapter 27

n

Management of Trauma to the Teeth and Supporting Tissues

A

B

C

D

573

Figure 27-7 A, Radiographic appearance of the restored maxillary right central incisor 10 days after a complicated crown

fracture occurred and the calcium hydroxide pulpotomy was performed. A fragment restoration was also used to restore the
class II fracture of the maxillary left central incisor at this same appointment, but after this radiograph was obtained. B, This
radiograph, made 7½ weeks after the pulpo­tomy, shows evidence of a calcified bridge developing at the level of the pulpal
amputation. C, Eight months after initial treatment, it appears that root development is progressing normally for both maxillary central incisors. D, Root completion has been achieved on both maxillary central incisors 20 months after the original
injury. The root canals exhibit normal anatomic configuration.

of restoration is completed, the dentinal bridge that has
formed after the pulpotomy can be perforated and routine endodontic procedures can be undertaken in a now
completely developed root canal.
Occasionally a patient has an acute periapical abscess
associated with a traumatized tooth. The trauma may
have caused a very small pulp exposure that was overlooked, or the pulp may have been devitalized as a result
of injury or actual severing of the apical vessels. A loss of
pulp vitality may have caused interrupted growth of the
root canal, and the dentist is faced with the task of treating a canal with an open apex.
If an abscess is present, it must be treated first. If there
is acute pain and evidence of swelling of the soft tissues, drainage through the pulp canal will give the child
­almost immediate relief. A conventional endodontic access opening should be made into the pulp chamber.

If pain is caused by the pressure required to make the
opening into the pulp, the tooth should be supported by
the dentist’s fingers. Antibiotic therapy is also generally
indicated.

THERAPY TO STIMULATE ROOT GROWTH
AND APICAL REPAIR IN IMMATURE
TEETH WITH PULPAL NECROSIS
APEXIFICATION
The conventional treatment of pulpless anterior teeth usually requires apical surgery if the teeth have open apices.
Many young teeth have been saved in this manner. However, a less traumatic endodontic therapy called apexification has been found to be effective in the management
of immature, necrotic permanent teeth. The apexification

574

Chapter 27

n

Management of Trauma to the Teeth and Supporting Tissues

A

B

C

D

E

G
F
Figure 27-8 A, Severe complicated fracture of the maxillary right central incisor. The trauma occurred approximately 60 minutes earlier. B, Maxillary periapical radiograph of traumatized incisor. Note the apical closure of the root tip. C, After appropriate infiltration of local anesthesia (no local anesthesia was injected into the pulp tissue at the fracture site), approximately 2
mm of pulpal tissue at the fracture was removed by means of a number 4 round diamond with gentle water irrigation. This
created an undercut in tooth structure, facilitating retention of calcium hydroxide to be placed later during the procedure.
Note the excellent hemostasis of the amputated pulp tissue. D, A cotton pellet, moistened with sterile saline, was placed over
the pulpal tissue for 5 minutes. E, After verification of excellent hemostasis following use of the moistened cotton pellet, calcium hydroxide was used to fill the area created during pulp removal. F, Maxillary radiograph after placement of the calcium
hydroxide. G, Clinical picture of incisor 3 months after the traumatic event. Normal responses to both electric and cold pulptesting were obtained at 1-, 2-, and 3-month observation intervals. A permanent restoration is planned.

Chapter 27

n

Management of Trauma to the Teeth and Supporting Tissues

A

B

C

D

E

F

575

Figure 27-9 Series of radiographs demonstrating treatment to stimulate root-end development of a pulpless young anterior

permanent central incisor. A, An injury several months before had resulted in a pulp exposure. An acute abscess was present
at the beginning of treatment. An opening to the pulp chamber was made to allow for drainage. B, Four days after the initial
treatment, the canal length was established. Files were used to clean the canal. After cleansing and irrigation of the canal,
calcium hydroxide and camphorated mono-parachlorophenol were used to fill the canal. C, One month after initial treatment.
D, Six months after initial treatment, a definite calcified stop was encountered when the file was introduced. The canal was
cleansed thoroughly, and gutta-percha was used to fill the canal. E, Five months after the placement of the gutta-percha canal
filling. F, A 6-month postoperative radiograph. A tube and resin core was placed, and the tooth was restored with a jacket
crown. Currently, an aesthetic bonded composite resin restoration (or a fragment restoration if possible) would probably be
the preferred interim restoration until the patient has attained adulthood. (Courtesy Drs. Paul E. Starkey and Joe Camp.)
procedure should precede conventional root canal therapy
in the management of teeth with irreversibly diseased pulps
and open apices.
Frank described a technique based on the normal
physiologic pattern of root development that brings
about the resumption of apical development so that the
root canal can be obliterated by conventional canal-filling techniques.14 The procedure has been demonstrated
to be successful in repeated clinical trials stimulating the
process of root end development, which was interrupted
by pulpal necrosis, so that it continues to the point of
apical closure (Fig. 27-9).14 Often a calcific bridge develops just coronal to the apex. When the closure occurs,
or when the calcific “plug” is observed in the apical portion, routine endodontic procedures may be completed;
the possibility of recurrent periapical pathosis is thus
prevented.

The following steps are included in the technique:
  

1.	The affected tooth is carefully isolated with a rubber
dam, and an access opening is made into the pulp
chamber.
2.	A file is placed in the root canal, and a radiograph is
made to establish the root length accurately. It is important to avoid placing the instrument through the
apex, which might injure the epithelial diaphragm.
3.	After the remnants of the pulp have been removed
using barbed broaches and files, the canal is flooded
with hydrogen peroxide to aid in the removal of
debris. The canal is then irrigated with sodium hypochlorite and saline.
4.	The canal is dried with large paper points and loose
cotton.
5.	A thick paste of calcium hydroxide is transferred
to the canal. An endodontic plugger may be used

576

Chapter 27

n

Management of Trauma to the Teeth and Supporting Tissues

to push the material to the apical end, but excess
material should not be forced beyond the apex.
6.	A cotton pledget is placed over the calcium hydroxide, and the seal is completed with a layer of reinforced zinc oxide–eugenol cement.
  
Weine recommends that the apexification procedure be
completed in two appointments.15 After instrumentation,
irrigation, and drying of the canal during the first appointment, he advises sealing a sterile, dry, cotton pellet in the
pulp chamber for 1 to 2 weeks. Placing a calcium hydroxide
dressing in the canal is optional at the first appointment.
During the second appointment, the debridement procedures are repeated before the canal is filled with a thick paste
of calcium hydroxide and camphoric p-monochlorophenol
(CMCP) or calcium hydroxide in a methylcellulose paste.
Whether the tooth is filled in one or two appointments
(or more) should be determined to a large extent by the
clinical signs and symptoms present and to a lesser extent by operator convenience. All signs and symptoms of
active infection should be eliminated before the canal is
filled with the treatment paste. Absence of tenderness to
percussion is an especially good sign before the canal is
filled. Because of the wide-open access to periapical tissues, it is not always possible to maintain complete dryness in the root canal. If the canal continues to weep but
other signs of infection seem to be controlled after two
or three appointments, the dentist may elect to proceed
with the calcium hydroxide paste treatment.
As a general rule, the treatment paste is allowed to remain for 6 months. The root canal is then reopened to
determine whether the tooth is ready for a conventional
gutta-percha filling, as determined by the presence of a
“positive stop” when the apical area is probed with a file.
Often there is also radiographic evidence of apical closure.
Frank has described four successful results of apexification
treatment14: (1) continued closure of the canal and apex
to a normal appearance, (2) a dome-shaped apical closure
with the canal retaining a blunderbuss appearance, (3) no
apparent radiographic change but a positive stop in the apical area, and (4) a positive stop and radiographic evidence
of a barrier coronal to the anatomic apex of the tooth.
If apical closure has not occurred in 6 months, the root
canal is retreated with the calcium hydroxide paste. If
weeping in the canal was not controlled before the canal
was filled, retreatment is recommended 2 or 3 months
after the first treatment.
Ideally, the postoperative radiographs should demonstrate continued apical growth and closure as in a normal tooth. However, any of the other three previously
described results is considered successful. When closure
has been achieved, the canal is filled in the conventional
manner with gutta-percha.
Currently, there seems to be a trend away from the incorporation of antibacterial agents, such as CMCP, into
the calcium hydroxide treatment paste. It is generally
agreed that calcium hydroxide is the major ingredient
responsible for stimulating the desired calcific closure of
the apical area. Calcium hydroxide is also an antibacterial agent. It may be that CMCP does not enhance the
repair; on the other hand, its use as described here has
not been shown to be detrimental. Certainly more than

one treatment paste has been employed with success. Giuliani and associates have demonstrated the use of MTA
to form an apical plug for apexification in three clinical
cases16 (Fig. 27-10). The root canals of central incisors that
had suffered premature interruption of root development
as a consequence of trauma were rinsed with 5% sodium
hypochloride. Calcium hydroxide was then placed in the
canals for 1 week. Following this, the apical portion of the
canal (4 mm) was filled with MTA and the remaining portions of the root canals were closed with thermoplastic
gutta-percha. At the 6-month and 1-year follow-ups, the
clinical and radiographic appearance of the teeth showed
resolution of the periapical lesions. These researchers suggest that MTA is a valid option for apexification. They
also suggest that long-term outcome studies are needed to
test whether this treatment modality will be successful in
a large group of teeth.
Teeth treated by the apexification method are susceptible to fracture because of the brittleness that results from
nonvitality and from the relatively thin dentinal walls of
the roots. In addition, another important problem with
the calcium hydroxide apexification technique is the duration of therapy, which often lasts many months.

REGENERATIVE ENDODONTIC PROCEDURES
Regenerative Endodontic Procedures (REPs) can be defined as biologically based procedures designed to replace damaged structures, which include dentin, root
structures, and cells of the pulp–dentin complex.17 These
procedures provide a biological alternative to induce continuous root development and reduce the risk of fracture
associated with traditional treatments of immature teeth
with necrotic pulps, such as calcium hydroxide or MTA
apexification, where the root remains thin and weak (Fig.
27-11). The premise of endodontic regeneration was suggested in 1961, when Nygaard-Østby evaluated the role
of blood clots in endodontic therapy.18 In 1971 NygaardØstby and Hjørtdal discussed the use of growth-promoting substances to help in the healing process after partial
root canal filling.19 Following this, endodontic regenerative procedures were largely ignored for 30 years, until the
first clinical case of contemporary REPs was published by
Iwaya and colleagues in 2001.20 In the last two decades
numerous case reports and retrospective clinical studies
have demonstrated notable improvements in some clinical outcomes after REP treatment of immature teeth with
pulpal necrosis. These improvements include healing of
periapical pathology, continued development of the root
apex, and increased thickness of the root canal wall.
Nakashima and Akamine described three key ingredients for tissue engineering: stem cells, scaffolds, and
growth factors.21 Stem cells are undifferentiated cells that
continuously divide. Numerous types of multipotent
adult stem cells have been identified from teeth and were
hypothesized to play an important role in endodontic
regeneration, such as stem cells from apical papilla, dental pulp stem cells, and periodontal ligament stem cells.
The second key element is the scaffold, which provides
a matrix for cell organization, proliferation, differentiation, and revascularization. Contemporary REPs have
used dentin and blood clots to provide scaffolds in the

Chapter 27

A

C

n

Management of Trauma to the Teeth and Supporting Tissues

577

B

D

Figure 27-10 A, Maxillary right central incisor with periapical pathology secondary to trauma. The canal has been opened,
rinsed with 5% sodium hypochlorite, dried, and filled with calcium hydroxide. B, Approximately 7 days after initial treatment
with calcium hydroxide, the incisor was instrumented to remove all remaining tissue before further treatment. C, The apical 4 to 5 mm of the incisor root has been filled with mineral trioxide aggregate (MTA). D, The incisor has completed initial
treatment with MTA. A temporary restoration has been placed to seal the canal opening. It was thought that several months
of observation would be desirable before the final gutta-percha placement on top of the MTA apical seal. (Courtesy Dr. Joseph
Legan.)

root canal. However, various scaffolds made of natural or
synthetic materials have been proposed in an attempt to
create more controlled three-dimensional scaffolds inside
the root canal.22 The third key element is growth factors.
These are biological signaling proteins that regulate cellular proliferation, differentiation, and maturation. Current
REPs rely mainly on the ability of root canal dentin to
release important signaling molecules that may play an
important role in regenerative procedures.
Most contemporary REPs rely on the chemical debridement of the root canal as there is minimal or no mechanical instrumentation. The main objective of chemical debridement is the elimination of microorganisms and necrotic tissues from the root canal system, and this step

has been suggested to be the essential factor in successful
REPs. Root canal irrigation with sodium hypochlorite has
been suggested to disinfect the root canal and to eliminate the necrotic organic materials from the canal system
during REPs. However, higher concentrations of sodium
hypochlorite have harmful effects on the differentiation and survival of dental pulp stem cells.23 Therefore
1.5% sodium hypochlorite has been suggested for use in
REPs due to its minimal toxic effects on dental pulp stem
cells. On the other hand, root canal irrigation with 17%
ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA) has been recommended as a final irrigation step during REPs. EDTA was
suggested to condition the superficial root canal walls,
expose the dentin protein matrix, and improve dental

578

Chapter 27

n

Management of Trauma to the Teeth and Supporting Tissues

A

B

C

D

Figure 27-11 Series of radiographs demonstrating the case of an immature necrotic tooth treated with the endodontic regeneration approach according to the recent guidelines of the American Association of Endodontists. A, Immature permanent
upper right lateral incisor with pulpal necrosis and periapical abscess secondary to dental trauma. The pulp chamber was
accessed, canal length was established, and pus was drained from the canal via small capillary tubes connected to high-speed
suction. The canal was rinsed with 20 mL of 1.5% sodium hypochlorite, followed by 20 mL of sterile saline, and dried with paper points. Triple antibiotic paste composed of clindamycin, ciprofloxin, and metronidiazole was prepared and placed into the
canal by means of a special syringe. B, Four weeks after the initial treatment, no negative clinical signs and symptoms were
observed. The canal was accessed, irrigated with 17% EDTA, and dried with paper points. A size 60 endodontic file was used
to lacerate the apical papilla and induce bleeding into the canal up to the cemento-enamel junction. A small piece of Colla
Tape was placed over the clot, and 3 mm of white MTA was applied to seal the access opening, followed by a composite resin
permanent restoration. C, Six-month follow-up radiograph shows the start of root maturation with an increase in root length.
D, Thirteen-month follow-up radiograph indicates complete root formation with an increase in length and thickness of the
root.

Chapter 27

pulp stem cell proliferation. However, intracanal medicaments used in REPs, such as various antibiotic mixtures
and calcium hydroxide, have also been suggested to have
a role in exposing various dentinal proteins.24 The application of intracanal medicaments has been adopted in all
suggested REPs. The most widely used intracanal medicament in endodontic regeneration is the triple antibiotic
paste described by Hoshino et al.,25 which is a mixture
of water and equal parts of metronidazole, ciprofloxacin,
and minocycline. However, significant tooth discoloration after the application of triple antibiotic paste has
been reported to occur due to staining of the dentin by
the minocycline present in the paste. Sealing the pulp
chamber with flowable composite resin before the triple
antibiotic paste application and maintaining the paste below the cemento-enamel junction have been suggested to
minimize the staining effect of the paste.26 Other authors
proposed eliminating the minocycline and keeping only
metronidazole and ciprofloxacin in the antibiotic paste
or substituting the minocycline with another antibiotic,
such as clindamycin, cefaclor, or amoxicillin.23 Recent
in vitro studies raised some concerns regarding the cytotoxic effects of various antibiotic combinations used
in REPs on the dental pulp stem cells. Therefore lower
concentrations of these antibiotic mixtures (0.1 mg/mL)
have been recommended to avoid stem cell toxicity.27 It
is noteworthy that the short-term application of calcium
hydroxide paste has also been successfully used in REPs.28
Indeed, the effects of calcium hydroxide paste were found
to be less detrimental to stem cells of the apical papillae, as compared with various antibiotic mixtures.27 A
biocompatible disinfection protocol utilizing both irrigation solutions and intracanal medicament to effectively
eradicate a root canal infection and create an environment conducive to the proliferation and differentiation
of dental pulp stem cells is an important aim to improve
the outcomes of REPs.
Currently, there is no standardized clinical protocol regarding REPs. Indeed, several variations of REPs have been
suggested. The American Association of Endodontists has
recommended the following treatment protocol based on
the best evidence level from clinical case studies and preclinical translational investigations (see Fig. 27-11).29

First Appointment
1.	After administration of adequate local anesthesia, the
affected tooth is carefully isolated with a rubber dam,
and an access opening is made into the pulp chamber.
2.	A file is placed 1 mm from the root end in the root
canal, and a radiograph is made to establish the root
length accurately.
3.	Each root canal is slowly irrigated with 20 mL of 1.5%
sodium hypochlorite for 5 minutes followed by irrigation with 20 mL of saline for 5 minutes. A closed-end
needle or the EndoVac negative pressure irrigation
system should always be used to deliver the irrigation
solutions during REP, to minimize the possibility of
extrusion of irrigants into the periapical space.
4.	The canal is dried with large paper points.
5.	Antibiotic or calcium hydroxide paste is applied into
the canal via a lentulo spiral or Centrix syringe. For

n

Management of Trauma to the Teeth and Supporting Tissues

579

antibiotic paste, mix equal portions of metronidazole,
ciprofloxacin, and minocycline with sterile water to
create a pasty consistency. However, a lower concentration of antibiotics is preferable (0.1 mg/mL).
6.	Seal the root canal with 3 to 4-mm Cavit, followed
by a temporary restorative material, and dismiss the
patient for 1 to 4 weeks.

Second Appointment
1.	Evaluate the affected tooth response to initial treatment. If there are no clinical signs or symptoms of
persistent infection, proceed with step 2. If there is
evidence (e.g., sinus tract, percussion sensitivity),
consider additional treatment with NaOCl irrigation
and the antibiotic intracanal medicament and recall
the patient after 1 to 4 weeks.
2.	After administration of adequate local anesthesia, 3%
mepivacaine (no epinephrine), the affected tooth is
isolated with a rubber dam.
3.	The root canal is accessed, and the intracanal paste
is removed by gentle irrigation with 20 mL of 17%
EDTA followed by normal saline, using a closed-end
needle or the EndoVac system.
4.	The canal is dried with large paper points.
5.	Bleeding is induced into the root canal by overinstrumentation with an endodontic file.
6.	Bleeding is stopped 3 mm from the cemento-enamel
junction.
7.	A collagen matrix such as CollaPlug (http://www.zim
merdental.com/Products/Regenerative) is placed at 3
mm below the cemento-enamel junction.
8.	A 3- to 4-mm layer of white MTA is placed, followed
by reinforced glass ionomer and permanent coronal
restoration. Glass ionomer may be a potential alternative to MTA in cases where crown discoloration is a
potential aesthetic concern.
  
Cases treated with REPs need to be followed up at 3
months, 6 months, and annually thereafter for 4 years.
Absence of signs and symptoms of pathosis, as well as
radiographic evidence of bony healing within 2 years
of treatment, should be expected. However, the clinical expectations for REPs are not well defined. Geisler30
suggested that the degree of success of REPs can be measured by the achievement of a primary goal, which is
the absence of symptoms and radiographic evidence of
periapical healing. Secondary desirable yet not essential
goals are increases in the thickness of the root walls and/
or increases in the length of the immature root. Tertiary
goals, indicating a high level of success, include regaining the vitality of the tooth. Clinical signs and symptoms
after REPs, such as swelling, pain, or an increase in radiolucency, indicate failure of REPs, and more traditional
treatment modalities should be initiated, such as MTA
apexification.

REACTION OF THE TOOTH TO TRAUMA
PULPAL HYPEREMIA
The dentist must be cognizant of the inadequacies of
present methods of determining the initial pulpal reaction

580

Chapter 27

n

Management of Trauma to the Teeth and Supporting Tissues

A
Figure 27-12 Maxillary left primary central incisor became

discolored within 2 weeks after trauma. A pulp test indicated that the pulp was vital.

to an injury and of the difficulty in predicting the longrange reaction of the pulp and supporting tissues to the
insult. A trauma of even a so-called minor nature is immediately followed by pulpal hyperemia.
Congestion of blood within the pulp chamber a short
time after the injury can often be detected in the clinical
examination. If a strong light is directed to the labial surface of the injured tooth and the lingual surface is viewed
in a mirror, the coronal portion of the tooth will often
appear reddish compared with the adjacent teeth. The
color change may be evident for several weeks after the
accident and often indicates a poor prognosis.

B

INTERNAL HEMORRHAGE
The dentist will occasionally observe temporary discoloration of a tooth after injury. Hyperemia and increased
pressure may cause the rupture of capillaries and the escape
of red blood cells, with subsequent breakdown and pigment
formation. The extravasated blood may be reabsorbed before gaining access to the dentinal tubules, in which case
little if any color change will be noticeable and what does
appear will be temporary (Fig. 27-12). In more severe cases
there is pigment formation in the dentinal tubules. The
change in color is evident within 2 to 3 weeks after the
injury, and although the reaction is reversible to a degree,
the crown of the injured tooth retains some of the discoloration for an indefinite period. In cases of this type,
there is some chance that the pulp will retain its vitality, although the likelihood of vitality is apparently low
in primary teeth with dark-gray discoloration. Croll and
colleagues found that 33 of 51 traumatized teeth (65%)
with gray-black discoloration were necrotic.31 Holan and
Fuks conducted a retrospective study of 88 pulpectomized
primary incisors, 48 of which met their nine clinical and
radiographic criteria for further investigation.32 Briefly,
their criteria included dark-gray coronal discoloration as
the primary diagnostic sign before pulpectomy. The remaining criteria were indicative of normal conditions or
conditions only somewhat suggestive of a pulpal problem.
They found that 47 (98%) of the teeth included in the
study were either necrotic (37, or 77%) or partially necrotic
(10, or 21%). Because all of these teeth were previously
determined to need pulpectomy, the 98% confirmation is
not surprising. However, the fact remains that all the teeth

C
Figure 27-13 A, Radiograph demonstrates almost complete
obliteration of the pulp chambers and canals. B, Normal
root resorption of the primary incisors has occurred. C, The
permanent incisors have erupted.

exhibited dark-gray discoloration and few, if any, other
minor signs or symptoms of a problem. Discoloration that
becomes evident for the first time months or years after an
accident, however, is evidence of a necrotic pulp.

CALCIFIC METAMORPHOSIS OF THE DENTAL
PULP (PROGRESSIVE CANAL CALCIFICATION
OR DYSTROPHIC CALCIFICATION)
A frequently observed reaction to trauma is the partial or
complete obliteration of the pulp chamber and canal (Fig.
27-13). Although the radiograph may give the illusion of
complete obliteration, an extremely fine root canal and
remnants of the pulp will persist.
The crowns of teeth that have undergone this reaction
may have a yellowish, opaque color. Primary teeth demonstrating calcific metamorphosis will usually undergo
normal root resorption, although Peterson and colleagues

Chapter 27

n

Management of Trauma to the Teeth and Supporting Tissues

581

have reported observing one patient who exhibited calcific metamorphosis of a maxillary primary central incisor
that subsequently showed evidence of significant internal resorption in the root.33 They emphasize the need for
careful monitoring of traumatized teeth that have undergone calcific metamorphosis.
Permanent teeth will often be retained indefinitely.
However, a permanent tooth showing signs of calcific
changes as a result of trauma should be regarded as a
potential focus of infection. A small percentage of such
teeth demonstrate pathologic change many years after
the injury (Fig. 27-14).

INTERNAL RESORPTION

Figure 27-14 Trauma occurred 10 years before acute symp-

toms developed in the left central incisor. An apical lesion
area may be seen. The right central incisor was lost at the
time of the injury.

Internal resorption is a destructive process generally
believed to be caused by odontoclastic action. It may
be observed radiographically in the pulp chamber or
canal within a few weeks or months after an injury.
The destructive process may progress slowly or rapidly.
If progression is rapid, it may cause a perforation of the
crown or root within a few weeks (Fig. 27-15). Mummery described this condition as “pink spot” because
when the crown is affected, the vascular tissue of the
pulp shines through the remaining thin shell of the
tooth.34 He referred to the occurrence of a perforation
as “perforating hyperplasia of the pulp.” If evidence of
internal resorption is detected early, before it becomes

A
B

Figure 27-15 Internal resorption in a traumatized left

C

primary incisor. A, The tooth 6 months after injury.
The tooth has a slight color change as compared with
the nontraumatized maxillary right primary incisor.
B, A later radiograph shows internal resorption in the
pulp chamber and canal and some evidence of attempted repair. C, This radiograph shows the subsequent degree of resorption. The tooth was extracted.

582

Chapter 27

n

Management of Trauma to the Teeth and Supporting Tissues

extensive with resulting perforation, the tooth may
possibly be retained when endodontic procedures are
instituted.

PERIPHERAL (EXTERNAL) ROOT RESORPTION
Trauma with damage to the periodontal structures may
cause peripheral root resorption (Fig. 27-16). This reaction starts from without, and the pulp may not become
involved. Usually the resorption continues unabated
until gross areas of the root have been destroyed. In
exceptional cases the resorption may become arrested,
and the tooth may be retained. Peripheral root resorption is most often observed in cases of severe trauma in
which there has been some degree of displacement of
the tooth.

PULPAL NECROSIS
Little relationship exists between the type of injury to the
tooth and the reaction of the pulp and supporting tissues.
A severe blow to a tooth causing displacement often results in pulpal necrosis. The blow may cause a severance
of the apical vessels, in which case the pulp undergoes
autolysis and necrosis. In a less severe type of injury, the
hyperemia and slowing of blood flow through the pulpal
tissue may cause eventual necrosis of the pulp. In some

cases the necrosis may not occur until several months after the injury.
A tooth receiving an injury that causes coronal fracture may have a better pulpal prognosis than a tooth
that sustains a severe blow without fracturing the
crown. Part of the energy of the blow dissipates as the
crown fractures, rather than all of the energy’s being
absorbed by the tooth’s supporting tissues. Thus the
periodontium and the pulp of the injured tooth sustain
fewer traumas when the crown fractures. The prognosis for long-term retention of the tooth and for maintenance of pulp vitality may then improve. However,
because some teeth do not recover from traumatic blows
that seem relatively minor, all injured teeth should be
closely monitored.
Injured teeth with subsequent pulpal necrosis are commonly asymptomatic, and the radiograph is essentially
normal. It should be realized, however, that these teeth
are probably infected and that acute symptoms and clinical evidence of infection will inevitably develop at a later
date. The tooth with a necrotic pulp should therefore be
extracted or treated with endodontic procedures, whichever is indicated.
A necrotic pulp in an anterior primary tooth may be
successfully treated if no extensive root resorption or
bone loss has occurred (Fig. 27-17). The treatment technique is essentially the same as that for permanent teeth.
However, trauma to the periapical tissues during canal
instrumentation must be carefully avoided. After the canal has been properly prepared via a facial access in this
example, it is filled with slow-setting zinc oxide–eugenol.
The canal walls are first lined with a thin mix of the canalfilling material. A thicker mix should then be placed in
the pulp chamber. Over this is placed a pledget of cotton, and the material is forced into the canal with a small
amalgam plugger.

ANKYLOSIS

Figure 27-16 Radiographic evidence of peripheral root

resorption. In these teeth the pulp vitality was retained and
root resorption did not continue.

Another reaction observed after trauma to anterior primary or permanent teeth is ankylosis, a condition caused
by injury to the periodontal ligament and subsequent
inflammation, which is associated with invasion by osteoclastic cells. The result is irregularly resorbed areas on
the peripheral root surface. In histologic sections, repair
can be seen that may cause a mechanical lock or fusion
between alveolar bone and the root surface. Clinical
evidence of ankylosis is seen as a difference in the incisal plane of the ankylosed tooth and adjacent teeth.
The adjacent teeth continue to erupt, whereas the ankylosed tooth remains fixed in relation to surrounding
structures. The radiograph may show an interruption in
the periodontal membrane of the ankylosed tooth, and
often the dentin may appear to be continuous with alveolar bone.
The ankylosed anterior primary tooth should be removed if there is evidence of its causing delayed or ectopic eruption of the permanent successor. If ankylosis of a
permanent tooth occurs during active eruption, eventually a discrepancy between the position of this tooth and
its adjacent ones will be obvious. The uninjured teeth will
continue to erupt and may drift mesially, with a loss of

Chapter 27

n

Management of Trauma to the Teeth and Supporting Tissues

A

B

C

D

E

F

583

G
Figure 27-17 A, Evidence of dark crown for the maxillary left central incisor, demonstrating possible pulpal necrosis. A pulp
test indicated that the pulp was nonvital. B, A conservative facial access was used to enter the pulp chamber. This access
helped maintain tooth structure for the final restoration. C, The canal was instrumented to remove all necrotic tissue. Special
care was taken not to traumatize the periapical tissue during instrumentation. D, A paper point was used to dry the canal
thoroughly before placement of the filling material. E, A slow-setting zinc oxide–eugenol mix was gently spun into the canal
by rotary instrumentation. F, Postoperative radiograph showing excellent filling of the canal to the apex of the tooth. G, Final
restoration after the necrotic pulp was addressed. A facial composite restoration was used as a conservative restoration in this
clinical presentation. (Courtesy Dr. James Weddell.)

584

Chapter 27

n

Management of Trauma to the Teeth and Supporting Tissues

arch length. Therefore either surgical repositioning or the
removal of a permanent tooth that becomes ankylosed is
often necessary, especially if the ankylosis occurs during
the preteen or early teen years.

RESTORATION OF FRACTURED TEETH
The restoration of a fractured tooth is as important as
the emergency treatment designed to aid in the recovery of the pulp after the trauma. Several restorations
have been advocated, and although the dentist has a
wide choice of techniques and types of restorations, the
circumstances surrounding the case often dictate the
type of restoration for a given patient. The prognosis of
pulp healing, the amount of tooth structure remaining,
the stage of eruption of the tooth and adjacent teeth,
the size of the dental pulp and degree of root closure,
the normalcy of the occlusion, and the wishes of the
patient must all be considered in the selection of a temporary restoration, an intermediate restoration, or the
permanent restoration. In the young patient, although
it is often desirable to wait for continued eruption of
the tooth or to determine the outcome of a vital pulp
procedure, a delay of even a few weeks is often sufficient to allow the tipping of adjacent teeth, overeruption of opposing teeth, or other undesirable changes in
the occlusion.

A

B

C

AESTHETIC BONDED COMPOSITE RESIN
RESTORATION
The feathered-edge restorative technique without mechanical tooth preparation is appropriate in some situations, but it requires excessive contour in the restoration.
It offers the advantage of creating less irritation to the
pulp because little or no enamel modification is required.
In some cases the excess contour is relatively insignificant, but it may be more significant if the restoration is
large (50% or more of the crown) or the fracture extends
near or below gingival tissue. Excessive contour on the
lingual surface of a maxillary anterior tooth may interfere
with normal occlusion.
A beveled preparation affords the dentist the opportunity to reduce the amount of overcontouring of larger
restorations, and it reduces contour in areas where the occlusion prohibits overcontouring. The dentist may elect
the feathered-edge technique (no preparation) on the
labial tooth surface and the beveled preparation on the
proximal or lingual surface, or both. Both techniques are
described in the following discussion.
When a beveled preparation is desired, the bevel is
made in the enamel around the entire circumference or
the selected part of the fracture (Fig. 27-18). The bevel
should be about 1 to 2 mm incisocervically and about
halfway (or more) through the thickness of the enamel
at the fracture margins. The labial enamel margin should
be irregular to provide a better aesthetic blending of the
resin with the tooth structure. This sequence may be altered if the practitioner uses some of the latest-generation
bonding adhesive systems.
The exposed dentin from a recent injury may be covered with a calcium hydroxide liner. Dilute phosphoric

D
Figure 27-18 A, Typical uncomplicated crown fracture of a

permanent incisor. B, Dotted line represents the approximate location of the irregular enamel margin to be placed
on the labial surface in the bevel preparation. C, Bevel
preparation complete and ready for etching. D, Bonded
composite material restored natural contour and color.

acid (etchant or tooth conditioner) is applied to the
enamel surface of the preparation for about 20 seconds
(longer for primary teeth). The tooth is then thoroughly flushed with water, and excess moisture is removed
with air. The etched area should appear frosty and
opaque. Alternatively, the total-etch technique may be
used. In either case a bonding agent is applied to all
etched tooth structures. Again, this sequence may be
altered with the use of some of the latest bonding adhesive systems.
A celluloid matrix strip may be placed interproximally and wedged for close adaptation at the gingival
margin. In large restorations a custom-cut celluloid
crown form matrix may be used to help contour the
restoration.
Often, little or no mechanical preparation of the fractured incisor is necessary with the feathered-edge technique. Instead, the resin margins are allowed to overlap
the fractured edges to become feathered-edge margins

Chapter 27

n

Management of Trauma to the Teeth and Supporting Tissues

585

Dentin
Enamel
Ca(OH)2 layer (optional)
Bonding agent
Composite resin

Figure 27-19 This sagittal drawing illustrates the applica-

tion of a feathered-edge restoration on a fractured incisor.
Little or no tooth preparation is required before calcium
hydroxide (optional) is placed on the exposed dentin and
the tooth is etched. Slight beveling of the fractured enamel
margins is suggested. The drawing also illustrates the need
for overcontouring of the labial and lingual surfaces with
the feathered-edge restoration.

on the etched sound enamel cervical to the fracture (Fig.
27-19). This procedure requires a slightly overcontoured
restoration and therefore has limitations. The dentist
should be alert to potential undesirable changes in
gingival health or the creation of traumatic occlusion.
Slight beveling of the fractured enamel margins is usually recommended with the feathered-edge technique
to remove loose enamel rods and ensure a fresh surface
for etching. The exposed dentin may be protected with
a layer of hard-setting calcium hydroxide, and etching
should extend 2 or 3 mm beyond the fracture to allow
an adequate surface for feather-edging of the resin restorative materials. Most manufacturers supply a kit,
which usually includes an etchant, a bonding agent, the
restorative materials, and a shade guide. The bonding
agent is applied to the etched surfaces.
The light-polymerized materials offer the advantage of
allowing the clinician to build or sculpt the restoration in
small increments and minimize finishing time. Clinical
studies have confirmed that excellent and durable restorations may be obtained. Finishing disks and large, round
finishing burs or diamonds may be used to contour the
labial and lingual surfaces.

REACTION OF PERMANENT TOOTH
BUDS TO INJURY
The dentist who provides emergency care for a child after
an injury to the anterior primary teeth must be aware of

Figure 27-20 Skull of a 5-year-old child demonstrating

the relationship between the position of the roots of the
primary central and lateral incisors and the crowns of their
permanent successors (see arrows).

the possibility of damage to the underlying developing
permanent teeth.
Andreasen and colleagues have reported on the effects
of injuries to primary teeth on their permanent successors.35 In a clinical and radiographic study of 213 teeth,
these investigators reported that more than 40% of their
young patients had changes in the permanent teeth that
could be traced to injury to the primary dentition. The
close anatomic relationship between the apices of primary teeth and their developing permanent successors
explains why injuries to primary teeth may involve the
permanent dentition (Fig. 27-20).
The dentist and the physician should also be aware of
the possibility of trauma to permanent tooth buds from
other unusual injuries so that parents may be informed
of the possibility of defective permanent tooth development. Some injuries to the face and jaws may not appear to have caused any dental injuries initially, but the
problem may be noticed several months or years later
(Fig. 27-21).

HYPOCALCIFICATION AND HYPOPLASIA
Cutright’s experiments with miniature pigs have shown
many lesions similar to those seen in permanent human
teeth as a result of trauma, infection, or both.36 He observed
small areas that showed destruction of the ameloblasts
and a pitted area where a thin enamel layer had been laid
down before the injury. In other teeth there was evidence
of destruction of the ameloblasts before any enamel had
been laid down, resulting in hypoplasia that clinically appeared as deep pitting.

586

Chapter 27

n

Management of Trauma to the Teeth and Supporting Tissues

Figure 27-21 This radiograph of a 4-year-old child reveals

improper formation of the mandibular left first permanent
molar. At 18 months, the child had been viciously attacked
by a dog. There had been a severe puncture wound of the
lower left jaw from the dog’s canines, although it was not
known then that the injury involved the permanent molar
tooth bud. The calcified lesion was removed and microscopically diagnosed as a developing tooth with displaced
enamel matrix into follicular tissue. Early removal enhanced
the potential of the normally developing second permanent
molar to eventually acquire an acceptable first permanent
molar position.
Figure 27-22 Radiograph of malformed central incisor. This

Permanent teeth in humans may show a variety of
these defects, including gross malformations of the crown
(Fig. 27-22). The presence of a small, pigmented hypoplastic area has been referred to as Turner tooth. Small hypoplastic defects may be restored by the resin-bonding
technique.

condition can be traced to a severe trauma to the primary
teeth.

REPARATIVE DENTIN PRODUCTION
In cases in which the injury to the developing permanent
tooth is severe enough to remove the thin covering of
developing enamel or cause destruction of the ameloblasts, the subjacent odontoblasts have been observed to
produce a reparative type of dentin. The irregular dentin
bridges the gap where there is no enamel covering to aid
in protecting the pulp from further injury.

DILACERATION
The condition referred to as dilaceration occasionally
occurs after the intrusion or displacement of an anterior primary tooth. The developed portion of the tooth
is twisted or bent on itself, and in this new position
growth of the tooth progresses. Cases have been observed in which the crown of a permanent tooth or a
portion of it develops at an acute angle to the remainder of the tooth (Fig. 27-23). Kilpatrick and colleagues
reported a dilacerated root of a primary central incisor
in a 6-year-old boy.37 The tooth was necrotic, the root
had not resorbed, and the apex of the root was exposed
in the labial sulcus and was associated with a draining
sinus. No specific history of trauma could be confirmed,
but the child was prone to accidents. The authors speculate that this unusual dilaceration may have been due to
injury soon after initial eruption of the tooth.

A

B

Figure 27-23 A, The degree of intrusion of the primary
tooth. Damage to the permanent teeth often results from
an injury of this type. B, Radiograph obtained 8 months
after the injury shows that the injured tooth has re-erupted.
The pulp has retained its vitality, although there is evidence
of partial obliteration of the pulp canal. External root resorption has occurred on the adjacent central incisor.

DISPLACEMENT OF PRIMARY AND
PERMANENT ANTERIOR TEETH
(LUXATION)
INTRUSION AND EXTRUSION OF TEETH
The displacement of anterior primary and permanent teeth
presents a challenge in diagnosis and treatment for the

Chapter 27

Figure 27-24 Radiograph of intruded primary central inci-

sor with its root apex lying labial to the permanent central
incisor.

dentist. Relatively few studies have been reported that can
be used as a guide for the treatment of injuries of this type.

Primary Teeth
Intrusion by forceful impaction of maxillary anterior primary teeth is a common occurrence in children during the
first 3 years of life. Frequent falls and striking of the teeth on
hard objects may force the teeth into the alveolar process to
the extent that the entire clinical crown becomes buried in
bone and soft tissue. Although there is a difference of opinion regarding treatment of injuries of this type, it is generally
agreed that immediate attention should be given to softtissue damage. Intruded primary teeth should be observed;
with few exceptions, no attempt should be made to reposition them after the accident. Most injuries of this type occur
at an age when it would be difficult to construct a splint or a
retaining appliance to stabilize the repositioned teeth.
Normally, the developing permanent incisor tooth
buds lie lingual to the roots of the primary central incisors. Therefore when an intrusive displacement occurs,
the primary tooth usually remains labial to the developing permanent tooth (Fig. 27-24). If the intruded primary
tooth is found to be in a lingual or encroaching relationship to the developing permanent tooth, it should be
removed. Such a relationship may be confirmed from a
lateral radiograph of the anterior segment.
The examination should be carried out as previously
described, and radiographs should be made to detect evidence of root fracture, fracture of the alveolar bone, and
damage to permanent teeth. However, predicting whether
the permanent successors will show evidence of interrupted growth and development is impossible unless actual
encroachment of their space can be seen radiographically.
Primary anterior teeth intruded as a result of a blow may
often re-erupt within 3 to 4 weeks after the injury. In a study
of the results of 248 traumatic episodes to primary incisors,
Ravn reported 88 cases of intrusion.38 Of these teeth, four
were extracted within 2 weeks because of infection and four
did not re-erupt and were extracted several months later, but
the remaining 80 teeth fully re-erupted within 6 months.
Incipient re-eruption was observed 14 days after the injury

n

Management of Trauma to the Teeth and Supporting Tissues

587

in a few instances. These teeth may even retain their vitality and later undergo normal resorption and be replaced on
schedule by their permanent successors. During the first 6
months after the injury, however, the dentist often observes
one or more of the reactions of the pulp and supporting tissues that have been mentioned previously in this chapter,
the most common of which is pulpal necrosis. Even after reeruption, a necrotic pulp can be treated if the tooth is sound
in the alveolus and no pathologic root resorption is evident.
Primary teeth that are displaced but not intruded
should be repositioned by the dentist or parent as soon
as possible after the accident, to prevent interference with
occlusion. The prognosis for severely loosened primary
teeth is poor. Frequently the teeth remain mobile and undergo rapid root resorption.
Skieller observed 60 children treated for looseness of
one or more young teeth.39 Loosened teeth were divided
into three groups: simple looseness, dislocation with impaction, and dislocation with extrusion. He concluded
that the immediate and future prognosis for the pulp was
more favorable if root formation was still incomplete at the
time of the accident. Root resorption, which was observed
in all three groups of loosened teeth, was most common
in impaction cases. Teeth with complete root formation
seemed to undergo resorption more frequently than those
with incomplete root formation. However, when resorption did occur, it was more extensive and progressed more
rapidly in teeth with incomplete root development.

Permanent Teeth
Intruded permanent teeth apparently have a poorer prognosis than similarly injured primary teeth. The tendency
for the injury to be followed by rapid root resorption,
pulpal necrosis, or ankylosis is greater.
The treatment for a permanent tooth with a closed root
end, and intruded less than 3 mm, is to allow the tooth
to erupt without intervention. If no movement is evident
after 2 to 4 weeks, the tooth may be repositioned either
orthodontically or surgically before ankylosis can take
place. If the tooth is intruded 7 mm or more, the tooth
is repositioned surgically and stabilized for 4 to 8 weeks
by means of a flexible splint. In most instances the pulp
will become necrotic with intrusive injuries in teeth with
complete root formation. Root canal treatment should be
initiated, with calcium hydroxide as a temporary canalfilling material, 2 to 3 weeks after stabilization.5
The treatment for an intruded permanent tooth with
incomplete root formation is to allow it to erupt spontaneously. If no movement is seen within a few weeks,
orthodontic repositioning should begin. If the tooth is
intruded 7 mm or more, the tooth can be repositioned
surgically and stabilized by means of a flexible splint.
Endodontic therapy is often required, however, and the
tooth should be monitored closely while a decision on
endodontic therapy is pending.5
Recently Alkhalifa and Alazemi conducted a literature
review to assess the current strength of evidence of factors
important in choice of treatment for intrusive luxation of
permanent teeth.40 Only cohort studies comparing spontaneous eruption and surgical and orthodontic extrusion
were assessed. Of the 117 studies identified, only three

588

Chapter 27

n

Management of Trauma to the Teeth and Supporting Tissues

were suitable for inclusion in their analysis; these studies
were not meta-analyzed because of methodological and
clinical heterogeneity. The authors concluded that, given
that infection can be controlled by endodontic therapy,
it appears that spontaneous eruption results in the fewest
complications in immature teeth, regardless of the degree
of intrusion. There appear to be no significant differences
between surgical and orthodontic extrusion in terms of
adverse outcomes. Spontaneous eruption had a low failure rate of 5% to 12%. They believe that guidelines for
treatment are currently not based on strong evidence.
Wang and associates evaluated 603 teeth with uncomplicated crown fractures followed for 6 months or longer, 104
of which suffered luxation at the same time. The frequency
of pulpal necrosis in teeth with complete root development
was higher than in those with incomplete root development. Teeth with uncomplicated crown fractures with luxation and crown-fractured teeth with intrusion had a higher
incidence of pulpal necrosis than any other types of concurrent luxation. The incidence of pulpal necrosis within 3
months was significantly higher than in other time periods
evaluated. They concluded that a concurrent luxation injury
and complete root development are important risk factors of
pulpal necrosis with uncomplicated crown fractures.41
Tronstad and associates have reported on the management of severely intruded mature maxillary central incisors
in an 11-year-old patient in whom spontaneous re-eruption
occurred.42 Rather than repositioning the teeth to gain endodontic access, they performed a palatal gingivectomy and
endodontic treatment 10 days after the injury, while the
teeth remained in their intruded position. Eight weeks after the injury, the teeth had re-erupted naturally and were
judged to be near their original position. Similar management of severely intruded immature central incisors has
been reported by Shapira and colleagues.43 In these ­cases
the palatal gingivectomies and endodontic treatment
were performed 8 to 10 weeks after injury, when periapical
rarefactions and root resorption were noted radiographically. Accelerated spontaneous re-eruption of all treated
teeth was noted soon after the gingivectomies and calcium hydroxide endodontic treatments were performed.
Complete re-eruption of the teeth and apparent periapical
and periodontal healing had occurred 2 to 3 months after
the surgical intervention.
It seems that both treatment approaches to the treatment of severely intruded permanent teeth (early repositioning or waiting for spontaneous re-eruption) have
demonstrated reasonably successful results. However, the
affected teeth seem to benefit by early calcium hydroxide
endodontic therapy with either treatment approach. The
decision to reposition mechanically or hope for spontaneous re-eruption of intruded permanent teeth remains a
matter of clinical judgment that may be based on several
conditions associated with the particular case.
The extrusive luxation of a permanent tooth usually results in pulpal necrosis. The immediate treatment involves
the careful repositioning of the tooth and stabilization
following the technique described later in this chapter. If
mature repositioned teeth do not respond to pulp vitality
tests within 2 to 3 weeks after being repositioned, endodontic treatment should be undertaken before there is

evidence of root resorption, which often occurs after severe
injuries of this type. The need for endodontic intervention
is virtually certain in cases of significant extrusion (more
than 2 mm) of mature teeth. With extruded immature
teeth, the clinician should monitor the situation frequently and be prepared to intervene with endodontic therapy,
as described later, if conditions warrant.5

AVULSION AND REPLANTATION
Replantation is the technique in which a tooth, usually
one in the anterior region, is reinserted into the alveolus
after its loss or displacement by accidental means. There
are few reports in the literature of this technique’s proving successful for indefinite periods of time. For example,
Barry reports on functioning teeth that were replanted 42
years earlier.44 However, slow or even rapid root resorption often occurs with even the most precise and careful
technique. Replantation of permanent teeth continues to
be practiced and recommended, however, because prolonged retention is also achieved in many cases, especially when replantation occurs soon after the accident. The
replanted tooth serves as a space maintainer and often
guides adjacent teeth into their proper position in the
arch, a function that is important during the transitional
dentition period. The replantation procedure also has
psychological value. It gives the unfortunate child and
parents hope for success; even though they are told of the
possibility of eventual loss of the tooth, the early result
often appears favorable and softens the emotional blow
of the accident (Figs. 27-25 and 27-26).
The success of the replantation procedure is undoubtedly related to the length of time that elapses between
the loss of the tooth and its replacement in the socket.
The condition of the tooth and particularly the condition of the periodontal ligament tissue remaining on the
root surface are also important factors that influence the
success of replantation. There have been reports that immediate replacement of a permanent tooth occasionally
results in the maintenance of vitality and indefinite retention. However, replantation should generally be viewed as
a temporary measure. Under favorable conditions, many
replanted teeth are retained for 5 or 10 years and a few for
a lifetime. Others, however, fail soon after replantation.
Camp reports that the tooth most commonly avulsed
in both the primary and the permanent dentition is a
maxillary central incisor.45 Most often, an avulsion injury
involves only a single tooth. Avulsion injuries are three
times more frequent in boys than in girls and occur most
commonly in children from 7 to 9 years of age, when permanent incisors are erupting. Andreasen suggests that the
loosely structured periodontal ligament surrounding the
erupting teeth favors complete avulsion.46
The sooner a tooth can be replanted in its socket after avulsion, the better the prognosis will be for retention
without root resorption. Andreasen and Hjørting-Hansen
reported a follow-up study of 110 replanted teeth. Of those
replanted within 30 minutes, 90% showed no discernible
evidence of resorption 2 or more years later.47 However,
95% of the teeth replanted more than 2 hours after the injury showed root resorption. If the tooth has been out of
the mouth for under 30 minutes, the prognosis is therefore

Chapter 27

A

n

Management of Trauma to the Teeth and Supporting Tissues

589

B

Figure 27-25 A, Radiograph of a patient who lost a central incisor as the result of trauma. Replantation was performed.
B, After the replantation procedure, peripheral root resorption is evident along the mesial surface.

B
A

C

D

Figure 27-26 A, Radiograph of an avulsed maxillary right central incisor, with incomplete root development, that was positioned into the canal immediately upon arrival at the office. The patient was seen within 20 minutes after tooth avulsion. Note
the degree to which the tooth was repositioned to approximate its original position. Gentle pressure was exerted to place the
apex of the root in the ideal position. B, Radiograph of the avulsed central incisor showing that it is now at the desired position and has been stabilized with a section of 0.028-inch stainless steel wire. Note that at least one nontraumatized tooth, on
either side of the avulsed incisor, was used to anchor the splint. The splint will remain in place for at least 7 to 10 days.
C, Splint in place at the end of the initial appointment. D, Radiograph at the conclusion of 10 days of splint therapy. The incisor tested vital to both electric and cold pulp-testing. The incisor, to this date, has received periodic evaluation and has not
required follow-up pulp therapy.

590

Chapter 27

n

Management of Trauma to the Teeth and Supporting Tissues

more favorable. Also, if the apical end of the tooth is incompletely developed at the time of the injury, there is a greater
chance of regaining pulp vitality after replantation. If the
apex is closed, the dentist should proceed with a pulpectomy a few days after the replantation, even if the extraoral
time for the tooth was brief.
If a parent calls to report that a tooth has been avulsed,
and it can be determined that the injury is without other
oral, neurologic, or higher-priority physical complications, the dentist may instruct the parent to do the following (primary teeth should not be replanted)5:
  
1.	Keep the patient calm.
2.	Find the tooth and pick it up by the crown (the white
part). Avoid touching the root.
3.	If the tooth is dirty, wash it briefly (10 seconds) under
cold running water and reposition it. Try to encourage the patient/parent to replant the tooth. Bite on a
handkerchief to hold the tooth in position.
4.	If repositioning is not possible, place the tooth in a
suitable storage medium (see below).
5.	Seek emergency dental treatment immediately, unless
the patient was knocked unconscious. If the child was
unconscious for a period of time, first seek emergency
medical evaluation for a concussion.
  
If the parent cannot or will not replant it, the tooth
must be kept moist during the trip to the dental office.
Allowing the avulsed tooth to dehydrate before replantation is damaging to a favorable prognosis. Hanks’ buffered
saline, isotonic saline, and pasteurized bovine milk may
be the most favorable known storage media. Although tap
water has been a commonly recommended storage solution (and its use would be preferable to dehydration of
the tooth), it is hypotonic, and its use leads to rapid cell
lysis and increased inflammation on replantation.
The patient should receive immediate attention after
arriving at the dental office. If the tooth has not already
been replanted, the dentist should make every effort to
minimize the additional time that the tooth is out of the
socket. The patient’s general status should be quickly assessed to confirm that there are no higher-priority injuries.
If an evaluation of the socket area shows no evidence
of alveolar fracture or severe soft-tissue injury, the tooth
is intact, and only a few minutes have elapsed since the
injury, the dentist should replant the tooth immediately.
Under the conditions just described, every effort should
be directed toward preserving a viable periodontal ligament. Trope correctly asserts that treatment should be
directed at avoiding or minimizing the resultant inflammation that occurs as a direct result of the two main
consequences of tooth avulsion: attachment damage
and pulpal infection.48 If the tooth was cleanly avulsed,
it can probably be replanted without local anesthetic,
and obtaining the initial radiograph can also be delayed
until the tooth is replaced in the socket and held with
finger pressure. The minutes saved may contribute to a
more successful replantation. If a clot is present in the
socket, it will be displaced as the tooth is repositioned;
the socket walls should not be scraped with an instrument. If the tooth does not slip back into position with
relative ease when finger pressure is used, local anesthesia and a radiographic evaluation are indicated. Local
anesthetic should also be administered when fractured

B

A

Figure 27-27 Microscopic section of a tooth replanted with

the periodontal ligament intact. The reattachment of the
periodontal fibers is illustrated by their crossing the tear
in the periodontal ligament. A, Tooth. B, Alveolar bone.
(Courtesy Dr. Philip Sherman Jr.)

and displaced alveolar bone must be repositioned before
the tooth is replanted. Soft-tissue suturing may be delayed until the tooth has been replaced in the socket;
however, the suturing should be performed to control
hemorrhage before the tooth is stabilized with a bonded
splint. Splinting techniques are discussed in the next section of this chapter.
Sherman studied the mechanism by which the replanted tooth becomes secured in the alveolus.49 Intentional
replantation was performed on 25 incisors in dogs and
monkeys. The root canals were hermetically sealed with
gutta-percha, and the teeth were splinted for 1 month.
Subsequent microscopic examination under fluorescent
and incandescent light revealed deposition of secondary
cementum and new alveolar bone, which entrapped the
periodontal fibers (Fig. 27-27).
The preservation of an intact and viable periodontal
ligament is the most important factor in achieving healing without root resorption. Delicate handling of the
tooth, storage in an appropriate moist environment, quick
replantation, and appropriate stabilization are all important in preserving the periodontal ligament. Undesirable
periodontal ligament reactions may result in replacement
resorption (ankylosis) or inflammatory resorption of the
root. Either reaction may cause eventual loss of the tooth
unless the resorption can be controlled. Use of an ena­
mel matrix derivative (Emdogain; Biora, Chicago, IL, and

Chapter 27

n

Management of Trauma to the Teeth and Supporting Tissues

591

Malmö, Sweden) has been shown to increase the incidence
of healed periodontal ligament when this gel is applied to
the root surface of the avulsed tooth and/or inserted directly into the alveolar socket before implantation. It appears
to aid in preventing or retarding resorption and ankylosis.

Stabilization of Replanted Teeth
After replantation of a tooth that has been avulsed, a
splint is required to stabilize it during at least the first
week of healing. Camp45 has stated that an acceptable
splint
   should meet the following criteria:
1.	It should be easy to fabricate directly in the mouth,
without lengthy laboratory procedures.
2.	It should be able to be placed passively without causing forces on the teeth.
3.	It should not touch the gingival tissues, causing gingival irritation.
4.	It should not interfere with normal occlusion.
5.	It should be easily cleaned and allow for proper oral
hygiene.
6.	It should not traumatize the teeth or gingiva during
application.
7.	It should allow an approach for endodontic therapy.
8.	
It should be easy to remove.
  
The splint should also allow mobility of the replanted
tooth that is comparable with the normal mobility of a
tooth. Rigid stabilization seems to stimulate replacement
resorption of the root. Hurst has demonstrated that rigid
stabilization of a replanted tooth is detrimental to proper
healing of the periodontal ligament.50
The bonded resin and wire splint satisfies all the criteria
just described. It can be used in most situations requiring
the stabilization of one or more teeth if sufficient sound
teeth remain for anchorage. Rectangular or round orthodontic wire is bent to approximate the arch configuration
along the midportion of the labial surfaces of the teeth to
be incorporated into the splint. At least one sound tooth
on each side of the tooth to be stabilized is included. The
size of the wire is not too critical, but rectangular wire
should be at least 0.016 × 0.022 inch and round wire at
least 0.018 inch. If three or four teeth must be stabilized,
a stiffer wire (e.g., 0.028-inch round wire) is required. If
round wire is used, a right-angle bend should be made
near each end of the wire to prevent rotation of the wire
in the resin. A 20- to 30-pound-test monofilament nylon
line is an acceptable substitute for wire in the splint.
If the labial enamel surfaces to be etched are not plaquefree, they should be cleaned with a pumice slurry, rinsed,
thoroughly dried, and isolated with cotton rolls. The
enamel surfaces are etched with a phosphoric acid etchant;
the gel form is convenient. The enamel surfaces are thoroughly washed and dried again. The wire is then attached
to the abutment teeth by the placement of increments of
the resin material over the wire and onto the etched enamel. The resin should completely surround a segment of the
wire, but it should not encroach on the proximal contacts
or embrasures. The replanted tooth is then held in position
while resin is used to bond it to the wire. The resin may
be lightly finished if necessary after polymerization. The
splint is easily removed (usually 7 to 10 days later) by cutting through the resin with a bur to uncover the wire. The
remaining resin may then be removed with conventional

Figure 27-28 Bonded brackets and archwire splint.

finishing instruments. If the splint is used to stabilize lower
teeth, it may be necessary to affix the wire to the lingual
surfaces if placing it on the labial surfaces will interfere
with natural occlusion. Because lingual surfaces are more
likely to be contaminated with saliva during the procedure,
however, labial placement is preferred whenever possible.
Direct-bonded orthodontic brackets may also be placed
on the teeth, and a light labial archwire bent to conform
accurately to the natural curvature of the arch is then ligated to the brackets. The brackets are properly aligned
on the archwire and bonded to the abutment teeth first.
The avulsed tooth is then ideally positioned, and additional bonding material is placed, if necessary, to fill any
remaining small space between the tooth and the bracket
before being bonded to the splint. If performed properly,
this technique results in an excellent splint (Fig. 27-28).
However, it requires much more accurate and precise wire
bending than the bonded resin and wire technique (without brackets) to achieve a passive appliance.
If the patient has mental disabilities or immature behavior and does not tolerate foreign objects in the mouth
well, or if there are insufficient abutment teeth available
for the bonded resin and wire splint, the suture and bonded resin splint advocated by Camp45 may be an acceptable alternative (Fig. 27-29). The titanium trauma splint
has been developed by von Arx and colleagues to ease
the application and removal of the splint and to increase
comfort for the patient.51
In general, stabilization for replanted teeth without other
complications is required for 7 to 14 days. The periodontal
ligament fibers should have healed sufficiently after the first
week to allow the splint to be removed. However, the patient should be advised not to bite directly on the replanted
tooth for 3 to 4 weeks after the injury and then gradually
to begin to return to normal use of the tooth. During this
time, food may be cut into bite-size pieces and chewed carefully with unaffected teeth. The patient should maintain
good oral hygiene by brushing and flossing normally and
using chlorhexidine mouthrinses.
We recommend that systemic antibiotic therapy begin
immediately and continue for at least a week following
replantation. If the apex is closed, extending the antibiotic therapy until the pulp is extirpated seems to be a good
way to determine the duration of antibiotic coverage. Research by Sae-Lim and associates has shown that antibiotic therapy is effective in preventing the development of
external inflammatory root resorption of replanted teeth
in which the pulps were not extirpated.52 This finding

592

Chapter 27

n

Management of Trauma to the Teeth and Supporting Tissues

A

B

C

D

F
E

G

H

Figure 27-29 Suture and bonded resin splint. A, The maxillary central incisors as seen at the initial presentation at the office.

The maxillary left central incisor was avulsed and placed in its socket by the parent (approximately 30 minutes after being
avulsed) after being instructed to do so by the front desk staff on the way to the office. B and C, The area has been initially
cleansed, and suturing has been accomplished to reapproximate the lacerated gingival tissue. There are not sufficient teeth to
provide adequate anchorage adjacent to the replanted maxillary central incisors. D, The incisal edges of the maxillary central
incisors are etched, per manufacturer’s instructions, before resin placement. E, Retention grooves have been created in the
resin on the incisal edges of the maxillary central incisors. F, A suture is placed over each tooth. Starting at the labial tissue,
each suture crosses the incisal edge, enters and exits the lingual tissue, recrosses the incisal edge, and reenters the labial tissue. The ends are then tied. Care is taken to ensure that no contact with the opposing occlusion is present. G and H, Clinical
presentation at 7 (sutures removed) and 21 days after initial replantation. Both teeth are stable in their respective sockets, with
minimal mobility, and gingival tissue health is improved. Pulp testing demonstrated necrosis in both maxillary central incisors,
and root canal therapy was scheduled.

Chapter 27

suggests that antibiotic therapy may also be helpful in
those cases in which the pulps of immature replanted
teeth are allowed to remain while revitalization remains
a possibility. Additional studies in this area are indicated.
Krasner and Rankow have published detailed recommendations for replanting a tooth based on its status as
judged by the clinician’s determination of the physiologic condition of the root periodontal ligament cells, the
development of the root apex, and the length of extraoral
time.53 Their recommendations recognize 10 different
categories of avulsed teeth and detail a specific treatment
regimen for each category. A modified version of Guidelines for the Management of Avulsed Permanent Teeth
from the International Association of Dental Traumatology is shown in Box 27-1.54 Of course, the dentist should
confirm at the time of replantation that the patient is adequately immunized against tetanus.

Endodontic Management of Replanted Teeth
All replanted permanent teeth with complete apical root
development should undergo a pulpectomy soon after replantation regardless of the length of time the tooth was
out of the mouth. Even though a few reports of revitalization exist, the chances for revitalization are remote at
best. Moreover, adverse reactions are virtually certain if
degenerating pulp tissue is allowed to remain in the canals for more than a few days. The risk-benefit ratio for
the patient favors pulpal extirpation.
Because replantation should be done as soon as possible after the injury, the dentist should not take time to
extirpate the pulp before replantation. The pulp should be
extirpated before the splint is removed, however, and preferably within 1 week after the injury. A sterile, dry cotton
pellet or one dampened with CMCP and blotted on sterile
gauze may be sealed in the pulp chamber after debridement
and irrigation. The canal should be filled approximately 2
weeks after the injury. When the canal is filled, calcium
hydroxide paste is the material of choice. However, Trope
suggests that the pulp contents be removed at the emergency visit and a tetracycline-corticosteroid combination
(Ledermix; Sigma Pharmaceuticals Pty Lid., Croydon, Victoria, Australia) be placed in the root canal.48 He believes
that this combination decreases the inflammatory response
after replantation to allow for more favorable healing than
in those teeth that do not receive the medicament.
Root canal treatment should be initiated 7 to 10 days
after replantation. Early extirpation of the pulp may help
to control the early onset of inflammatory root resorption.54 Filling the root canal with calcium hydroxide also
controls and may even arrest external inflammatory root
resorption. If the calcium hydroxide is placed in the canal
too soon (before adequate healing of the periodontal ligament), however, it may stimulate replacement root resorption. Andreasen suggested that 2 weeks after replantation is
the ideal time to fill the canal with calcium hydroxide. The
use of calcium hydroxide as a root-canal–filling material
was described previously in the discussion of apexification.
If the avulsed permanent tooth has immature root formation with an open apex, the chances of pulpal revitalization after replantation improve considerably, especially
if replantation occurs within 30 minutes after avulsion. If

n

Management of Trauma to the Teeth and Supporting Tissues

593

the avulsed tooth has been cared for properly, there is a
small chance for revitalization even if the tooth is replanted within 1 hour after the injury. However, many teeth do
not revitalize. Those that do respond favorably may still
require root canal treatment several months later. During
the time beyond 1 week that the pulp tissue is allowed to
remain, evaluation of the tooth is recommended at weekly
intervals until favorable signs of healing without pulpal pathosis are conclusive (vitality tests are unreliable) or until
a decision is made to extirpate the pulp. The pulp should
be extirpated when the first signs of degeneration appear.
Rubber dam isolation is always desirable when pulp
therapy is performed. It can usually be used even during
the pulp extirpation procedure, while several teeth are
splinted together. Instead of separate holes in the rubber
dam for each tooth, a slit is made so that the rubber can
be placed over all teeth in the splinted segment. This does
not afford ideal isolation, but it is generally better than the
use of cotton rolls. In addition, the rubber dam helps prevent the swallowing or aspiration of foreign objects during
treatment. If small endodontic instruments are used without rubber dam protection, they should be secured with a
length of dental floss to facilitate retrieval in the unlikely
event that they are dropped in the patient’s mouth.
The calcium hydroxide material used to fill the root canal should be replaced every 3 to 6 months until a decision
is made to fill the canal with gutta-percha. The optimum
duration of the calcium hydroxide treatment is unknown,
but generally calcium hydroxide should be kept in the canal for at least 6 months or until root end closure (apical
plug) occurs beyond 1 year. In cases in which an adjacent
tooth is still unerupted, calcium hydroxide treatment is
recommended until eruption of the adjacent tooth.55 It
is believed that eruption may stimulate or accelerate the
resorptive process in a nearby replanted root.

MANAGEMENT OF ROOT FRACTURES
Root fracture of primary teeth is relatively uncommon
because the more pliable alveolar bone allows for displacement of the tooth. When root fracture does occur,
it should be treated in the same manner as recommended
for permanent teeth; however, the prognosis is less favorable. The pulp in a permanent tooth with a fractured root
has a better chance to recover.
Root fractures that occur in the apical half of the tooth
are more likely to undergo repair (Fig. 27-30). Fractures in
the apical third are often repaired without treatment. In fact,
many apparently are undetected until evidence of a calcified
repair is seen radiographically sometime after the injury.
Andreasen56 has described four tissue reactions after root
fracture: (1) healing with calcified tissue, which is characterized by a uniting callus of hard tissue that may consist of
dentin, osteodentin, or cementum; (2) healing with interposition of connective tissue, in which the fractured root
surfaces are covered by cementum with connective tissue
fibers joining the two fragments; (3) healing with interposition of bone and connective tissue, in which a bony
bridge and connective tissue are positioned between the
fragments; and (4) interposition of granulation tissue.
The last is the least favorable form of attempted repair,
and the fracture will not heal spontaneously. The teeth

594

Chapter 27

n

Management of Trauma to the Teeth and Supporting Tissues

Box 27-1
Categories for Treatment of Avulsed Teeth
1. Closed apex, tooth replanted prior to the patient’s
arrival at the dental office
Treatment
•	Leave the tooth in place.
•	Clean the area with water spray, saline, or chlorhexidine.
•	Suture gingival lacerations if present.
•	Verify normal position of the replanted tooth both clinically and radiographically.
•	Apply a flexible splint for up to 2 weeks.
•	Administer systemic antibiotics. Tetracycline is the first
choice (Doxycycline 2x per day for 7 days at appropriate
dose for patient age and weight). The risk of discoloration
of permanent teeth must be considered before systemic
administration of tetracycline in young patients. (In many
countries tetracycline is not recommended for patients
under 12 years of age.) In young patients, Phenoxymethyl Penicillin (Pen V) or amoxicillin, at an appropriate dose
for age and weight, is an alternative to tetracycline.
•	If the avulsed tooth has been in contact with soil and
if tetanus coverage is uncertain, refer to physician for a
tetanus booster.
•	Initiate root canal treatment 7-10 days after replantation
and before splint removal.
Patient instructions
•	Avoid participation in contact sports.
•	Eat only soft food for up to 2 weeks.
•	Brush teeth with a soft toothbrush after each meal.
•	Use a chlorhexidine (0.1%) mouthrinse twice a day for 1
week.
Follow-up
•	Splint removal and clinical and radiographic control after
2 weeks.
•	Root canal treatment 7-10 days after replantation.
•	Clinical and radiographic control after 4 weeks, 3 months,
6 months, 1 year, and then yearly thereafter.
2. Closed apex, extraoral dry time less than 60 minutes: The tooth has been kept in physiologic storage
media or osmolality-balanced media (milk, saline,
saliva, or Hanks’ Balanced Salt Solution) and/or
stored dry for less than 60 minutes
Treatment
•	Clean the area with water spray, saline, or chlorhexidine.
•	Re-implant the tooth in the socket.
•	Suture gingival lacerations if present.
•	Verify normal position of the replanted tooth both clinically and radiographically.
•	Apply a flexible splint for up to 2 weeks.
•	Administer systemic antibiotics (see previous comments).
•	If the avulsed tooth has been in contact with soil and
if tetanus coverage is uncertain, refer to physician for a
tetanus booster.
•	Initiate root canal treatment 7-10 days after replantation
and before splint removal.
Patient instructions (see previous comments)
Follow-up (see previous comments)

3. Closed apex, extraoral dry time greater than
60 minutes, suggesting non-viable cells
Delayed replantation has a poor long-term prognosis.
The periodontal ligament will be necrotic and cannot be
expected to heal. The goal in delayed replantation is, in
addition to restoring the tooth for aesthetic, functional,
and psychological reasons, to maintain alveolar bone
contour. However, the expected eventual outcome is ankylosis and resorption of the root, and the tooth will be
lost eventually.
Treatment
•	Clean the area with water spray, saline, or chlorhexidine.
•	Re-implant the tooth in the socket.
•	Suture gingival lacerations if present.
•	Verify normal position of the replanted tooth both clinically and radiographically.
•	Apply a flexible splint for up to 2 weeks.
•	Administer systemic antibiotics (see above).
•	If the avulsed tooth has been in contact with soil and
if tetanus coverage is uncertain, refer to physician for a
tetanus booster.
•	Initiate root canal treatment 7-10 days after replantation
and before splint removal.
To slow osseous replacement of the tooth, treatment of
the root surface with fluoride prior to replantation has been
suggested (2% sodium fluoride solution for 20 minutes).
Patient instructions (see previous comments)
Follow-up (see previous comments)
Ankylosis is unavoidable after delayed replantation and
must be taken into consideration. In children and adolescents, ankylosis is frequently associated with infraposition.
Careful follow-up is required and good communication is
necessary to assure the patient and guardian of this likely
outcome. Decoronation may be necessary when infraposition (>1 mm) is seen. For more detailed information on this
procedure, the reader is referred to textbooks.
1. Open apex, tooth replanted prior to the patient’s
arrival at the dental office or clinic
Treatment
•	Leave the tooth in place.
•	Clean the area with water spray, saline, or chlorhexidine.
•	Suture gingival laceration if present.
•	Verify normal position of the replanted tooth both clinically and radiographically.
•	Apply a flexible splint for up to 1-2 weeks.
•	Administer systemic antibiotics (see previous comments).
•	If the avulsed tooth has been in contact with soil and
if tetanus coverage is uncertain, refer to physician for a
tetanus booster.
•	The goal for replanting still-developing (immature) teeth
in children is to allow for possible revascularization of the
tooth pulp. If that does not occur, root canal treatment is
recommended.
Patient instructions (see previous comments)
Follow-up (see previous comments)

Chapter 27

n

Management of Trauma to the Teeth and Supporting Tissues

595

Box 27-1
Categories for Treatment of Avulsed Teeth—cont’d
2. Open apex, extraoral dry time less than 60 minutes.
The tooth has been kept in physiologic storage media
or osmolality-balanced media (milk, saline, saliva, or
Hanks’ Balanced Salt Solution) and/or stored dry for less
than 60 minutes
Treatment
•	Clean the root surface and apical foramen with a stream
of saline.
•	Topical application of antibiotics has been shown to enhance chances for revascularization of the pulp and can
be considered if available (minocycline or doxycycline 1
mg per 20 mL saline for 5-minute soak).
•	Administer local anesthesia.
•	Examine the alveolar socket. If there is a fracture of the
socket wall, reposition it with a suitable instrument.
•	Irrigate the socket with saline.
•	Replant the tooth slowly with slight digital pressure.
•	Suture gingival lacerations, especially in the cervical area.
•	Verify normal position of the replanted tooth clinically
and radiographically.
•	Apply a flexible splint for up to 2 weeks.
•	Administer systemic antibiotics (see previous comments).
•	If the avulsed tooth has been in contact with soil and
if tetanus coverage is uncertain, refer to physician for a
tetanus booster.
Patient instructions (see previous comments)
Follow-up (see previous comments)
The goal for replanting still-developing (immature) teeth
in children is to allow for possible revascularization of the
pulp space. The risk of infection-related root resorption
should be weighed against the chances of revascularization.
Such resorption is very rapid in children. If revascularization
does not occur, root canal treatment may be recommended.

3. Open apex, extraoral dry time greater than 60
minutes, suggesting non-viable cells
Delayed replantation has a poor long-term prognosis. The
periodontal ligament will be necrotic and is not expected
to heal. The goal in delayed replantation is to restore the
tooth to the dentition for aesthetic, functional, and psychological reasons and to maintain alveolar contour. The eventual outcome will be ankylosis and resorption of the root.
Treatment
•	Remove attached non-viable soft tissue with gauze.
•	Root canal treatment can be carried out prior to replantation or later.
•	Administer local anesthesia.
•	Irrigate the socket with saline.
•	Examine the alveolar socket. If there is a fracture of the
socket wall, reposition it with a suitable instrument.
•	Replant the tooth slowly with slight digital pressure.
•	Suture gingival lacerations if present.
•	Verify normal position of the replanted tooth clinically
and radiographically.
•	Stabilize the tooth for 4 weeks using a flexible splint.
•	Administer systemic antibiotics (see previous comments).
•	If the avulsed tooth has been in contact with soil or if
tetanus coverage is uncertain, refer to physician for evaluation of the need for a tetanus booster.
To slow osseous replacement of the tooth, treatment of
the root surface with fluoride prior to replantation has been
suggested (2% sodium fluoride solution for 20 minutes).
Patient instructions (see previous comments)
Follow-up (see previous comments)
Ankylosis after delayed replantation (see previous
­comments)

Adapted from The Dental Trauma Guide: Avulsion-First Aid for Avulsed Teeth, International Association of Dental Traumatology, http://www.
dentaltraumaguide.org

usually present unfavorable symptoms that may be accompanied by fistulas resulting from necrosis of the coronal portion and also sometimes the apical portion of the
pulp. These teeth require follow-up endodontic treatment
or extraction.
Gross separation of the root fragments invariably
causes inflammation in the area and subsequent resorption of the approximating fractured surfaces. For repair to
take place, the fragments must be maintained in apposition. Therefore splinting is usually necessary, particularly
if the coronal fragment is mobile.
Although a relatively long stabilization period (3
months) has been previously recommended for teeth with
fractured roots, Cvek and colleagues have cast doubts on
the efficacy of long-term splinting and the types of splints
used for root fracture healing.57,58 Previously, a longer stabilization period seemed necessary to encourage a more
favorable type of healing of calcified tissue; however, their
study showed no significant difference in the frequency
of healing when short periods (under 60 days) and long

periods (60 to 90 days) of splinting were compared. They
found that hard-tissue healing also took place in teeth that
were not even splinted. A comparison between nonsplinted and splinted teeth showed no difference in frequency
of healing. They suggest that optimal positioning of dislocated fragments significantly increases the frequency of
healing, particularly in mature teeth. Their study showed
that, in immature teeth, healing took place even after suboptimal repositioning of dislocated coronal fragments and
persistent diastases between the fragments after splinting.
They conclude by suggesting that teeth with no or slight
loosening of the fragment may not require splinting.
In addition, there is general agreement that splints for
root fractures should be more rigid than the splints used
for stabilization after other types of displacement injuries.
Application of a more rigid splint is also believed to enhance the opportunity for calcified tissue repair. Therefore the use of heavier wires is recommended (0.032 to
0.036 inch) when one is stabilizing teeth with fractured
roots.

596

Chapter 27

A

n

Management of Trauma to the Teeth and Supporting Tissues

B

C

Figure 27-30 A, Root fracture is evident in the apical one third of the maxillary left central incisor. A splint was placed the day
of the fracture. The patient reported that both teeth received trauma (via a baseball to the area), although only the root of
the maxillary left central incisor was fractured. B, One month after initial splint placement. Both central incisors responded
favorably to pulp testing, and the splint was removed. Periodic evaluation and pulp testing were maintained. C, More than
2 years had elapsed when this radiograph revealed a normal periapical appearance to the maxillary left central incisor with
the fractured root. Pulp testing for the incisor was normal. The patient complained of pain associated with the maxillary right
central incisor (see developing periapical lesion) and was referred for endodontic evaluation.

The occlusion should be adjusted so that the injured
tooth is not further traumatized during normal masticatory function. Follow-up radiographs should be obtained
and pulp tests performed at frequent intervals during the
first 6 months after the injury.

OTHER DISPLACEMENT INJURIES OF TEETH
REQUIRING STABILIZATION
Teeth subjected to less severe luxation injuries may also
benefit from stabilization with a bonded resin and wire
splint during the recovery period. The severity of the
injury will help determine the length of time the splint
should remain in place. Splinting times may vary from 1
to 2 weeks, for teeth that have been discernibly loosened
(subluxation), to 4 to 6 weeks, for teeth that have been
laterally displaced, fracturing the alveolar process. As with
all tooth injuries, frequent periodic evaluation is required
for at least the first 6 months to afford the dentist the
opportunity for early intervention if adverse sequelae develop; after this, evaluation at regular recall appointments
should continue.
Nearly all significantly displaced teeth with closed
apices and many with open apices will require followup endodontic therapy. As with many of the other injuries already discussed, calcium hydroxide paste is the
currently recommended material for initial canal fi
­ lling,
and the canal should be recleaned and refilled with
calcium hydroxide periodically if signs or symptoms
­
warrant retreatment. This current recommendation of
using calcium hydroxide may change in the relatively
near future. Placement of a permanent gutta-percha
filling should be delayed for at least 1 year (arbitrarily

­determined), and the calcium hydroxide should be replaced at least once (again, arbitrarily determined) during this time. If the injured tooth had an open apex
when endodontic therapy was initiated, the calcium hydroxide filling material should be used until the apexification process is complete or at least 1 year has elapsed,
whichever is longer.

MANAGEMENT OF ORAL BURNS
As a result of secondary wound healing and scar contracture, burns involving the perioral and intraoral tissues can
cause various degrees of microstomia. A common cause
of oral burns is electrical trauma. The most frequently
encountered electrical injury to children is a burn about
the mouth. These burns occur most often in children between 6 months and 3 years of age and are equally common among boys and girls.
Oral electrical burns occur when (1) the child places
the female end of a “live” extension cord into the mouth,
(2) the child places the female end of a “live” appliance
cord (e.g., that for a hot plate, shaver, or portable radio)
into the mouth, or (3) the child sucks or chews on exposed or poorly insulated electrical wires.
How does the burn occur? One plausible theory is that
an electric arc is produced between a source of the current, such as the female end of an extension cord, and
oral tissues. The electrolyte-rich saliva provides a short
circuit between the cord terminals and the mouth, which
results in the arc phenomenon. This type of burn characteristically involves intense heat that causes coagulation
tissue necrosis.

Chapter 27

n

Management of Trauma to the Teeth and Supporting Tissues

597

NATURE OF THE INJURY
The clinical appearance of electrical burns is variable and
depends on several factors: (1) the degree and duration of
contact, (2) the source and magnitude of electric current, (3)
the state of grounding, and (4) the relative degree of resistance at the point of contact. The wound may be superficial,
involving only the vermilion border of one or both lips, or
it may be a very destructive, full-thickness, third-degree
burn. The more serious burns generally involve portions of
the upper and lower lips and the commissure. Damage with
more serious burns may extend intraorally to the tongue,
labial vestibule, floor of the mouth, or buccal mucosa. There
have also been reports of damage to hard tissue, such as the
mandible and the primary and permanent teeth.
With third-degree burns, subcutaneous tissues may be
damaged. The tissue destruction may be much more extensive than is initially evident. Because nerves are frequently
damaged, the patient will probably have paresthesia or anesthesia. Therefore pain is generally not a significant problem.
Hemorrhage is usually inconsequential because blood vessels are cauterized when the injury is sustained. However,
spontaneous arterial bleeding may occur anytime during
the first 3 weeks of healing. The hemorrhage may be caused
by the rupture of blood vessel walls weakened by the passage of current. Bleeding can also occur with sloughing of
necrotic tissue that overlies regenerating granulation tissue.
The clinical appearance of an electrical burn involving the lips and commissures is characteristic of a wound
caused by intense, localized heat, perhaps as high as
3000°C. Necrosis, in which there has been heat-induced
coagulation of protein, liquefaction of fats, and vaporization of tissue fluids, is evident.
During the first few days after the accident, the center of the lesion is generally composed of grayish or yellowish tissue that may be depressed relative to a slightly
elevated, narrow, erythematous margin of tissue that surrounds it (Fig. 27-31).
Within a few hours after the injury, there may be a
great increase in edema. The margins of the wound may
become ill-defined and the lips protuberant. The patient
may drool uncontrollably because of loss of sensation. In
7 to 10 days, the edema begins to subside. The delineation
between the central nonviable tissue and the surrounding
viable tissue becomes more apparent. The necrotic tissue,
known as eschar, becomes charred or crusty in appearance
and begins to separate from the surrounding viable tissue
(Fig. 27-32). The eschar sloughs off 1 to 3 weeks after the
burn incident. Healing occurs by secondary intention as
granulation tissue proliferates and matures. Two or three
months after the accident, the wound becomes indurated
as a result of fibrous tissue formation. For an additional 6
months, the immature fibrotic scar tissue may bind the
lips, alveolar ridges, and other involved structures. If such
tissue is not treated, its contraction results in unaesthetic
and functionally debilitating microstomia. The scar tissue softens as it matures, and by 9 months to 1 year after
the injury, the potential for tissue contraction is greatly
decreased. The duration of the healing process and the
selected course of treatment depend on the extent and severity of tissue destruction. Because of the variable nature

Figure 27-31 Appearance of injury to the upper lip and

commissure 5 days after electrical burn. (Courtesy
Dr. Theodore R. Lynch.)

Figure 27-32 Appearance of injury to the lower lip and

commissure 10 days after electrical burn. The dark lesion on
the lower lip is an eschar. (Courtesy Dr. Theodore R. Lynch.)

of burn injuries, surgery or appliance therapy may be used
or no treatment may be needed.

TREATMENT
Assessing the general physical status of a patient who
has sustained an electrical burn to the mouth is the first
priority. Subsequently, the extent of the burn is carefully
evaluated and local measures are initiated, such as control of minor hemorrhage or conservative debridement of
nonviable tissue.
The immunization status of the patient must be ascertained, and tetanus toxoid or depot triple antigen (diphtheria-pertussis-tetanus vaccine) administered when appropriate. Many physicians prescribe a broad-spectrum antibiotic
as prophylaxis. However, it may not be necessary or prudent
to prescribe antibiotics in the absence of infection.
The parents should be informed of the possibility of
spontaneous arterial hemorrhage that can occur during
the first 3 weeks. They should be instructed to place firm
pressure, with gauze, on the bleeding area for 10 minutes. If bleeding persists, they should take the child to the

598

Chapter 27

n

Management of Trauma to the Teeth and Supporting Tissues

­emergency department. Usually, hemorrhage is not a significant problem and does not warrant prophylactic hospitalization except for the most severe and extensive injuries.
The surgical management of burn injuries to the mouth,
especially with regard to the time when such surgery
should be performed, is controversial. Initially, no surgical
intervention is generally warranted. Instead, the treatment
of choice is the use of a prosthetic appliance. The primary
functions of such an appliance are to prevent contracture
of healing tissue and to serve as a framework on which a
more normal-appearing commissure may be created and
preserved after completion of the healing process. Many
patients at James Whitcomb Riley Hospital for Children
have been successfully treated with these appliances. Moreover, surgical procedures have not been needed in cases
with good patient compliance in appliance use.
The major components of the burn appliance are illustrated in Figure 27-33. The appliance is removed when the
patient eats, when the teeth and appliance are cleaned, or
when modifications of the wings are necessary. The appliance is a static base with wings extending laterally to
provide contact with both commissures. If symmetry relative to the midline is to be maintained during the healing
process, the wings must come into contact with the commissures equidistant from the midline and must exert essentially equal pressure at these points.

A

The shape and location of the wings are important not
only in preventing contracture or cohesion of the lips during healing but also in shaping the affected commissure
to duplicate the unaffected side. Each wing is contoured
so that it is thickest in its occlusocervical dimension on
the labial aspect. It is tapered as thinly as possible at the
point of contact with the commissure (Fig. 27-34). The
wings should be just large enough to maintain the correct
shape of the commissure. Wings of the proper size will
look more pleasing during wear and will enhance acceptance and compliance by the child and parent.
If compliance is a problem with an acrylic appliance, a
modified fixed appliance can be constructed and ligated
in the mouth. Bands are adapted on the upper second primary molars, and an impression is made. Headgear tubes
are welded onto the bands, and a Nance appliance is constructed from a 0.036- or 0.040-inch wire. If the Nance
button is not used, the wire is contoured along the gingival portion of the teeth.
After the stabilizing framework is made, the outer portion of the appliance is formed. The anterior arch form is
established with a 0.045-inch wire. Horizontal loops are
placed in the area approximating the location of the commissures, as determined by clinical measurements. The
wire is continued posteriorly, and omega loops are placed
mesial to the headgear tubes. Adjustments are made in
the acrylic in one or both of the omega loops to achieve
the correct fit. With the omega loops used as tiebacks, the
appliance is ligated in the mouth. The patient should be
evaluated as often as needed during the first month so that
necessary adjustments can be made. The patient should be
seen at least once a month thereafter.
Ideally, the patient with an oral electrical burn should
be seen by the dentist between the fifth and tenth days after the accident. The initial appointment is probably the
most crucial to the success or failure of treatment with
the burn appliance. Parental apprehension and feelings of
guilt are often high, and the trust and confidence of both
the parents and the child must be acquired as soon as possible. They should be told in detail what they can expect
from the dental services offered and what is expected of
them. The parents and the child should be shown pictures from previous cases. This not only demonstrates the
appearance and purpose of the appliance but also emphasizes that they are not the only ones who have experienced the physical and psychological trauma associated
with such an accident. Pictures of patients who did not
Reinforcing wire

B
Figure 27-33 A, Example of a burn appliance designed for
intraoral retention. B, Example of a burn appliance designed for intraoral and extraoral retention in combination
with headgear.

Figure 27-34 Cross-sectional view of the commissure wing

of the burn appliance.

Chapter 27

have an appliance or who did not wear their appliance as
instructed are also shown. The impact of such illustrative
materials is dramatic.
After the consultation session, the initial data are recorded, photographs are taken, and alginate impressions
are obtained for fabrication of the appliance. The appliance is generally delivered between the tenth and fourteenth days after the injury. At the delivery appointment
and at each subsequent appointment, the information
and instructions given in the initial consultation session
are reinforced. Constant encouragement and positive reinforcement are important psychological aids in enhancing compliance.

A

n

Management of Trauma to the Teeth and Supporting Tissues

599

After delivery of the appliance, the patient is seen as
often as needed during the first week, but at least once
during that time. The patient is checked again at 4 and
8 weeks after appliance delivery. During this period,
most of the major modifications to the wings and other
components of the appliance are made, and the patient’s
compliance is closely monitored. Once the appliance
is properly modified and the patient is wearing the appliance as instructed, the appointments can be spaced
out over 4- to 6-week intervals. The appliance should be
worn 24 hours a day for 9 to 12 months except when the
patient is eating and when the appliance is being cleaned
(Fig. 27-35).

B

C

D

E
Figure 27-35 A, Patient the day of the oral burn. There is considerable tissue damage with accompanying swelling at the patient’s left lower lip, extending from the midline to the commissure. B, Properly fitted burn appliance in place (see Fig. 27-39A
for specific appliance type used). C, Six-month result of appliance usage. Note the contour of the patient’s left commissure.
D, Nine-month result of appliance usage. Note that, at maximum opening, there is symmetry of the perioral area without
noticeable constriction at the left commissure. E, One year after the oral burn and optimal appliance usage.

600

Chapter 27

n

Management of Trauma to the Teeth and Supporting Tissues

Figure 27-36 Burn patient who did not wear the appli-

ance as recommended, shown 10 months after the injury.
Surgical correction will be considerably more difficult in this
patient.

The burn appliance may not eliminate the need for minor surgical revisions of the lips or surrounding cutaneous tissues. Its purpose is to obviate the necessity for more
difficult surgical procedures because good results are hard
to achieve and maintain when one is surgically restoring
the shape and location of the oral commissure. The appliance can prevent asymmetry of the commissures resulting from tissue cohesion and scar contracture. It can provide a more normal-appearing commissure after healing.
The successful use of this appliance ultimately depends
on patient compliance (Fig. 27-36).
Infants or toddlers who do not have primary molars
that can be used for intraoral anchorage will not be able
to retain the burn appliance without extraoral stabilization. Figure 27-37 illustrates a headgear type of extraoral
anchorage apparatus. It is made of durable cloth, such
as denim lined with gingham, and provides a static base
from which elastic material extends to the wings of the
burn appliance. A well-fitted bonnet may also be used.
Patients with burns to the mouth and who did not
have access to appliance therapy or were noncompliant
in wearing the burn appliance may have tissue cohesion, contraction, and deformation as a result of healing. Such patients may require a commissurotomy to
reestablish the original dimensions and symmetry of
the mouth. Unfortunately, with healing of the commissurotomy there is again a tendency for wound contraction and distortion. Therefore it may be necessary
for the patient to undergo more than one such surgical procedure unless surgery is followed by appliance
therapy.
Clinical management of the burn appliance after a
commissurotomy differs from management of the appliance after a burn injury. First, the appliance must be
delivered by the time the sutures are removed. By the second week after surgery, there may already be a decrease in
the lateral extension of the primary incision as a result of
wound healing. Second, the total time the patient needs
to wear the appliance may be less than 1 year, depending
on the clinical course of the healing process. The patient
still wears the appliance 24 hours a day except when eating and when the appliance is being cleaned.

A

B

C
Figure 27-37 A and B, Properly fitted burn appliance with
headgear to enhance stability and retention of the appliance. C, Nine-month result with appliance therapy.

TRAUMA PREVENTION
Dental practitioners should be proud that we are a
­prevention-oriented profession. Prevention is especially
predominant in dentistry for children. We strive to prevent dental caries, periodontal disease, malocclusion, and

Chapter 27

anxiety about dental care. If disease is present, our treatment becomes part of an overall prevention plan designed
to halt the progress of disease and prevent its recurrence.
The success of the prevention plan, provided that there is
parent and patient cooperation, is reasonably predictable.
Unfortunately, our ability to prevent injuries to oral
structures is limited. Living and growing carry a high risk of
trauma. A child will not learn to walk without falling, and
few children reach 4 years of age without having received
a blow to the mouth. We cannot totally prevent trauma.
Moreover, the results of treatment for trauma are often less
predictable than those of other types of dental treatment.
On the brighter side, there are preventive measures
that have been proved to reduce the prevalence of traumatic episodes in certain environmental situations. For
example, because the prevalence of fractured incisors is
higher among those with protrusive anterior teeth, many
dentists are recommending early reduction of excessive
protrusion to reduce the susceptibility of such teeth to
injury. The use of car safety seats and restraining belts has
prevented many injuries to infants and young children.
The protective mouthguard described in Chapter 24 has
prevented or reduced the severity of countless injuries to
the teeth of youngsters participating in organized athletic
activities; active youngsters should be encouraged to wear
their mouthguards during high-risk unsupervised athletic
activities as well.
Parents should be reminded that accessible “live” electric cords are potentially dangerous, especially to small
children who still use their mouths to evaluate their environment. In addition, anticipatory guidance and education are necessary to advise our patients regarding the
negative health effects of intraoral and perioral body piercing. Possible problems that can occur include scar tissue
formation, fracture of the dentition, allergic reactions, and
bacterial endocarditis in susceptible patients. When we
have the opportunity to save a child from pain and suffering, an ounce of prevention is worth a pound of cure.

REFERENCES
1.	Davis MJ, Vogel L: Neurological assessment of the child with
head trauma, J Dent Child 62:93–96, 1995.
2.	Davis MJ: Orofacial trauma management. Patient assessment
and documentation, N Y State Dent J 61(7):42–46, 1995.
3.	Rusmah M: Traumatized anterior teeth in children: a
24-month follow-up study, Aust Dent J 35:430–433, 1990.
4.	Andreasen JO, et al.: Effect of treatment delay upon pulp and
periodontal healing of traumatic dental injuries—a review
article, Dent Traumatol 18(3):116–128, 2002.
5.	Diangelis AJ, et al.: International Association of Dental Traumatology guidelines for the management of traumatic injuries: 1. Fractures and luxations of permanent teeth, Dent
Traumatol 28:2–12, 2012.
6.	Vilela Maia EA, et al.: Tooth fragment reattachment: Fundamentials of technique and two case reports, Quintessence Int
34:99–107, 2003.
7.	Macedo GV: Reattachment of anterior teeth fragments: A
conservative approach, J Esthet Restor Dent 20(1):5–18, 2008.
8.	Farik B, et al.: Fractured teeth bonded with dentin adhesives
with and without unfilled resin, Dent Traumatol 18:66–69,
2002.

n

Management of Trauma to the Teeth and Supporting Tissues

601

9.	Kanca J: Replacement of a fractured incisor fragment over
pulpal exposure: a long-term case report, Quintessence Int
27:829–832, 1996.
10.	Ludlow JB, LaTurno SA: Traumatic fracture—one-visit endodontic treatment and dentinal bonding reattachment of
coronal fragment: report of a case, J Am Dent Assoc 110:
341–343, 1985.
11.	Cvek M: A clinical report on partial pulpotomy and capping
with calcium hydroxide in permanent incisors with complicated crown fractures, J Endod 4:232–237, 1978.
12.	Fong CD, Davis MJ: Partial pulpotomy for immature permanent teeth, its present and future, Pediatr Dent 24:29–32,
2002.
13.	American Academy of Pediatric Dentistry: Guidelines on Pulp
Therapy for Primary and Immature Permanent Teeth, Pediatric
Dent 34:222–229, 2012.
14.	Frank AL: Therapy for the divergent pulpless tooth by continued apical formation, J Am Dent Assoc 72:87–93, 1966.
15.	Weine FS: Endodontic therapy, ed 6, St. Louis, 2004, Mosby,
528–529.
16.	Giuliani V, et al.: The use of MTA in teeth with necrotic
pulps and open apices, Dent Traumatol 18:217–221, 2002.
17.	Murray PE, Garcia-Godoy F, Hargreaves KM: Regenerative
endodontics: a review of current status and a call for action,
J Endod 33:377–390, 2007.
18.	Nygaard-Østby B: The role of the blood clot in endodontic therapy. An experimental histologic study, Acta Odontol
Scand 19:324–353, 1961.
19.	Nygaard-Østby B, Hjørtdal O: Tissue formation in the root
canal following pulp removal, Scand J Dent Res 79:333–349,
1971.
20.	Iwaya SI, Ikawa M, Kubota M: Revascularization of an immature permanent tooth with apical periodontitis and sinus
tract, Dent Traumatol 17:185–187, 2001.
21.	Nakashima M, Akamine A: The application of tissue engineering to regeneration of pulp and dentin in endodontics, J Endod
31:711–718, 2005.
22.	Hargreaves K, Law A: Regenerative endodontics. In Hargreaves K, Cohen S, editors: Cohen’s pathways of the pulp, ed
10, St. Louis, 2010, Mosby Elsevier, pp 602–620.
23.	Diogenes A, Henry MA, Teixeira FB, Hargreaves KM: An update on clinical regenerative endodontics, Endodontic Topics
28:2–23, 2013.
24.	Yassen GH, Chu TM, Eckert G, Platt JA: Effect of medicaments used in endodontic regeneration technique on the
chemical structure of human immature radicular dentin: an
in vitro study, J Endod 39:269–273, 2013.
25.	Hoshino E, Kurihara-Ando N, Sato I, et al.: In-vitro antibacterial susceptibility of bacteria taken from infected root dentine to a mixture of ciprofloxacin, metronidazole and minocycline, Int Endod J 29:125–130, 1996.
26.	Reynolds K, Johnson JD, Cohenca N: Pulp revascularization
of necrotic bilateral bicuspids using a modified novel technique to eliminate potential coronal discolouration: a case
report, Int Endod J 42:84–92, 2009.
27.	Ruparel NB, et al.: Direct effect of intracanal medicaments
on survival of stem cells of the apical papilla, J Endod 38:
1372–1375, 2012.
28.	Cehreli ZC, et al.: Regenerative endodontic treatment (revascularization) of immature necrotic molars medicated
with calcium hydroxide: a case series, J Endod 37:1327–1330,
2011.
29.	American Association of Endodontists: Considerations for
regenerative procedures. Available at: http: www.aae.org/
clinical-resources/regenerative-endodontics/considerationsfor-regenerative-procedures.aspx. Accessed December 29, 2013.

602

Chapter 27

n

Management of Trauma to the Teeth and Supporting Tissues

30.	Geisler TM: Clinical considerations for regenerative endodontic procedures, Dent Clin North Am 56:603–626, 2012.
31.	Croll TP, et al.: Traumatically injured primary incisors:
a clinical and histological study, J Dent Child 54:401–422,
1987.
32.	Holan G, Fuks AB: The diagnostic value of coronal dark-gray
discoloration in primary teeth following traumatic injuries,
Pediatr Dent 18:224–227, 1996.
33.	Peterson DS, et al.: Calcific metamorphosis with internal resorption, Oral Surg 60:231–233, 1985.
34.	Mummery JH: Some further cases of chronic perforating
hyperplasia of the pulp, the so-called “pink spot,” Br Dent J
47:801–811, 1926.
35.	Andreasen JO, et al.: The effect of traumatic injuries to the
primary teeth on their permanent successors, Scand J Dent
Res 79:219–283, 1971.
36.	Cutright DE: The reaction of permanent tooth buds to injury, Oral Surg 32:832–839, 1971.
37.	Kilpatrick NM, et al.: Dilaceration of a primary tooth, Int
J Paediatr Dent 1:151–153, 1991.
38.	Ravn JJ: Sequelae of acute mechanical traumata in the primary dentition, J Dent Child 35:281–289, 1968.
39.	Skieller V: The prognosis for young teeth loosened after mechanical injuries, Acta Odontol Scand 18:171–181, 1960.
40.	Alkhalifa JD, Alazemi AA: Intrusive luxation of permanent
teeth: a systematic review of factors important for treatment
decision-making, Dent Traumatol 30:169–175, 2014.
41.	Wang C, et al.: Analysis of pulp prognosis in 603 permanent
teeth with uncomplicated crown fracture with or without
luxation, Dent Traumatol 30(5):333–337, 2014.
42.	Tronstad L, et al.: Surgical access for endodontic treatment of
intruded teeth, Endod Dent Traumatol 2:75–78, 1986.
43.	Shapira J, et al.: Reeruption of completely intruded immature permanent incisors, Endod Dent Traumatol 2:113–116,
1986.
44.	Barry GN: Replanted teeth still functioning after 42 years:
report of a case, J Am Dent Assoc 92:412–413, 1976.
45.	Camp JH: Replantation of teeth following trauma. In McDonald RE, et al.: Current therapy in dentistry, vol 7. St. Louis,
1980, Mosby.
46.	Andreasen JO: Effect of extra-alveolar period and storage
media upon periodontal and pulpal healing after replantation of mature permanent incisors in monkeys, Int J Oral Surg
1:43–53, 1981.
47.	Andreasen JO, Hjørting-Hansen E: Replantation of teeth. I.
Radiographic and clinical study of 110 human teeth replanted after accidental loss, Acta Odontol Scand 24:263–286, 1966.

48.	Trope M: Clinical management of the avulsed tooth: present
strategies and future directions, Int Endod J 18:1–11, 2002.
49.	Sherman P Jr: A histologic study of intentional replantation of
teeth in dogs and monkeys, Master’s thesis. Indianapolis, 1967,
Indiana University School of Dentistry.
50.	Hurst RV: Regeneration of periodontal and transseptal fibers
after autografts in rhesus monkeys: a qualitative approach,
J Dent Res 51:1183–1192, 1972.
51.	von Arx T, et al.: Splinting of traumatized teeth with a new
device: TTS (titanium trauma splint), Dent Traumatol 17:
180–184, 2001.
52.	Sae-Lim V, et al.: Effect of systemic tetracycline and amoxicillin on inflammatory root resorption of replanted dogs’
teeth, Endod Dent Traumatol 14:216–220, 1998.
53.	Krasner P, Rankow HJ: New philosophy for the treatment of
avulsed teeth, Oral Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol Oral Radiol Endod 9:616–623, 1995.
54.	Andersson L, et al.: International Association of Dental Traumatology (IADT), Dent Traumatol 28:88–96, 2012.
55.	Waterhouse PJ, et al.: Pediatric endodontics: Endodontic
treatment for the primary and young permanent dentition.
In Cohen S, Hargreaves KM, editors: Pathways of the pulp, ed
10, St. Louis, 2010, Mosby, pp 808–857.
56.	Andreasen FM, Andreasen JO, Cvek M: Root fractures. In
Andreasen JO, Andreasen FM, Andersson L, editors: Textbook
and color atlas of traumatic injuries to the teeth, ed 4, 337-371,
Blackwell, 2007, Oxford.
57.	Cvek M, Andreasen JO, Borum MK: Healing of 208 intra alveolar root fractures in patients age 7-17 years, Dent Traumatol
17:53–62, 2001.
58.	Cvek M, Mejàre I, Andreasen JO: Healing and prognosis of
teeth with intraalveolar fractures involving the cervical part
of the root, Dent Traumatol 18:27–65, 2002.

SUGGESTED READINGS
Jones JE, Cooper MD: Tooth avulsion: a protocol for improved
success, Contemp Oral Hygiene 2(4):40–43, 2002.
Martins-Junior PA, et al.: Replantation of avulsed primary teeth:
a systematic review, Int J Paediatr Dent 24:77–83, 2014.
Palin WE, et al.: Perioral electrical injury in a pediatric population, J Oral Med 42:17–21, 1987.
Sadove AM, et al.: Appliance therapy for perioral electrical
burns: a conservative approach, J Burn Care Rehabil 9:391–
395, 1988.
Taylor LB, Walker J: A review of selected microstomia prevention appliances, Pediatr Dent 19(6):413–418, 1997.

CHAPTER

28

Tumors of the Oral Soft Tissues
and Cysts and Tumors of Bone
s John S. McDonald

For additional resources, please visit the

website.

CHAPTER OUTLINE
BENIGN TUMORS OF THE ORAL
SOFT TISSUES
Squamous Papilloma, Verruca
Vulgaris, and Condyloma
Acuminatum
Fibroma
Pyogenic Granuloma, Peripheral
Ossifying Fibroma, Peripheral
Odontogenic Fibroma (Who
Type), and Peripheral Giant Cell
Granuloma
Neurofibroma and
Neurofibromatosis (Von
Recklinghausen Disease)
Hemangioma
Lymphangioma
Congenital Epulis (Gingival Granular
Cell Lesion) of the Newborn

T

Mucocele
Ranula
BENIGN TUMORS OF BONE
Benign Fibro-Osseous Lesions of the
Jaws
Fibrous Dysplasia
Cemento-Ossifying Fibroma
Juvenile Ossifying Fibroma
Central Giant Cell Granuloma
ODONTOGENIC CYSTS
Primordial Cyst
Dentigerous Cyst
Eruption Cyst or Eruption
Hematoma
Odontogenic Keratocyst
(Keratocystic Odontogenic
Tumor)

oo often, dental practitioners see their responsibility to the patient as beginning and ending
with the care and maintenance of the teeth and
the periodontium. Physicians do not give oral health
the attention it deserves because, for the most part, they
do not receive education and training from this perspective. This leaves the responsibility to the dental practitioner to monitor and help maintain the overall health
and well-being of the patient, as evidenced in the orofacial and head and neck structures that are so obviously
within their purview. Even so, it remains easy to focus
strictly on the dental needs of the patient and remain
oblivious to, among other things, subtle or even not so
subtle lumps, bumps, swellings, or changes in texture
or color that may signify the presence of a reactive or
a hamartomatous overgrowth of tissue, or a benign or
malignant disease. These disorders occur within the oral
and maxillofacial region too often for the dentist to take
the attitude that they happen only in someone else’s
patients.
This chapter provides an overview of some of the more
frequently encountered cysts and tumors in the soft tissues and bone of the oral and maxillofacial region in the
pediatric age group.

Nevoid Basal Carcinoma (Gorlin)
Syndrome
ODONTOGENIC TUMORS
Ameloblastoma
Adenomatoid Odontogenic Tumor
Odontogenic Myxoma
Ameloblastic Fibroma
Ameloblastic Fibro-Odontoma
Odontoma
MALIGNANT TUMORS
Fibroblastic Tumors and
Fibrosarcoma in Infancy and
Childhood
Rhabdomyosarcoma
Osteogenic Sarcoma
Ewing’s Sarcoma
Langerhans Cell Histiocytosis
(Histiocytosis X)

BENIGN TUMORS OF THE ORAL SOFT
TISSUES
SQUAMOUS PAPILLOMA, VERRUCA VULGARIS,
AND CONDYLOMA ACUMINATUM
The squamous papilloma is a relatively common, benign
neoplasm that arises from the surface epithelium. It is
typically an exophytic lesion whose surface may vary
from cauliflower-like to finger-like in appearance, and although it is generally a pedunculated lesion, it may arise
from a sessile base. While the average age of occurrence is
in the fourth decade of life, nearly 20% of cases have been
noted to occur before 20 years of age.1,2 The most common sites of occurrence appear to be the palatal complex,
dorsal and lateral tongue borders, and lips, followed by
the gingiva and buccal mucosa. This lesion can, however,
also occur on the floor of the mouth, retromolar pad, and
alveolar ridges.
Oral verruca vulgaris, or oral warts, are exophytic papillomatous lesions clinically indistinguishable from oral squamous papillomas. Like their skin counterpart, the common
wart (verruca vulgaris), they are a viral disorder associated
with the human papillomavirus (HPV) and may be spread
603

604

Chapter 28

n

Tumors of the Oral Soft Tissues and Cysts and Tumors of Bone

A

B

Figure 28-1 A, Verruca vulgaris on the anterior tip of the tongue. This is an example of autoinoculation from finger-sucking. B,

Notice the wart on this patient’s finger from which he inoculated his tongue. (Courtesy Dr. Mark L. Bernstein.)

to the oral cavity in children through autoinoculation (Fig.
28-1); vertically (i.e., periconceptually around fertilization),
prenatally (during pregnancy), and perinatally (during birth
and within 28 days afterward); horizontally (as among family members possibly later in childhood) and through sexual
contact (i.e., sexual abuse).5,6 Skin types of HPV-2, 4, and 57
have been found in oral wart lesions.5,7
Although the histopathologic differences between
squamous papilloma and verruca vulgaris are subtle,
these lesions are distinguishable from one another. Histologically, the papilloma is seen as a proliferation of the
spinous cell layer in a papillary pattern, often with hyperkeratosis, acanthosis, and basilar hyperplasia. Mitotic
figures may be prominent. The supporting fibrous connective tissue stroma often contains prominent numbers
of small blood vessels as well as an inflammatory cell infiltrate. HPV DNA may, however, be commonly seen in
squamous cell papillomas (13 of 19 {68%} in one study),
most commonly types 6 and 11, or both.8
The presence of papillomatosis, often with convergence of rete ridges centrally, hyperkeratosis, a coarse
keratohyalin granular cell layer, and vacuolated cells with
pyknotic nuclei (koilocytes), may be used to differentiate
verruca vulgaris from a squamous papilloma. Hence, from
the foregoing discussion, both squamous papilloma and
verruca vulgaris should probably be considered benign,
virus-induced epithelial hyperplasias, and the identification of HPV does not appear to offer any diagnostic advantage because the histopathologic features alone allow
for differentiation of one from the other.9
Condyloma acuminatum (Fig. 28-2), or venereal
warts, are another type of HPV DNA infection that may
be found in children and adolescents. As with squamous
cell papillomas, the most prevalent virus types found are
HPV 6 and 11.7 They occur more frequently on the buccal or labial mucosa, soft palate, and tongue or lingual
frenum and often appear as a nontender exophytic mass
with short blunted papillary projections and a sessile
base. While usually considered to be sexually transmitted, they can be spread by autoinoculation and vertical
transmission from the mother, as discussed above for verruca vulgaris.

Treatment of oral squamous papilloma, verruca vulgaris, or condyloma acuminatum is best accomplished
by complete surgical excision of the lesion, including the
base.

FIBROMA
Fibroma is the most common benign soft-tissue tumor
found in the oral cavity. It is characteristically a domeshaped lesion with a sessile base and a smooth surface
that is usually the color of the surrounding mucosa. It
may vary from firm to flaccid in texture and most commonly occurs in sites predisposed to irritation or trauma,
such as the buccal mucosa, lip, tongue, gingiva, and hard
palate. It may occur at any age. Sometimes termed focal
fibrous hyperplasia, a fibroma occurring in the oral cavity
is reactive, being basically either a reactive type of fibrous
hyperplasia or, in some cases, a healed pyogenic granuloma that has undergone sclerosis.
Histologically, the fibroma is a dome-shaped lesion
composed of a fibrous connective tissue stroma that may
vary from loose and delicate to quite dense in its appearance, with an overlying layer of stratified squamous epithelium. Treatment consists of simple surgical excision.
There is little propensity for recurrence.

PYOGENIC GRANULOMA, PERIPHERAL
OSSIFYING FIBROMA, PERIPHERAL
ODONTOGENIC FIBROMA (WHO TYPE), AND
PERIPHERAL GIANT CELL GRANULOMA
Pyogenic Granuloma
Pyogenic granuloma is a relatively common soft-tissue tumor that arises from the fibrous connective tissue of the
skin or mucous membranes. Originally believed to be a
botryomycotic infection, it is now known to be a reactive
inflammatory process in which an exuberant fibrovascular proliferation of the connective tissue occurs secondary
to some low-grade, chronic irritation.
Clinically, pyogenic granuloma is a raised lesion on either a sessile or a pedunculated base. Its surface may have
a smooth, lobulated, or, occasionally, warty appearance
that is erythematous and often ulcerated (Fig. 28-3). Depending on the age of the lesion, the texture varies from

Chapter 28

n

A

Tumors of the Oral Soft Tissues and Cysts and Tumors of Bone

605

B

Figure 28-2 A 4-year-old male patient seen on routine new-patient examination with multiple dome-shaped lesions having

cauliflower-like surface and sessile base. Biopsy showed them to be oral condyloma acuminatum.

endothelial cells with the formation of prominent numbers of thin-walled, endothelium-lined vascular channels. A polymorphous inflammatory cell infiltrate is
present, and the overlying surface epithelium is often
ulcerated. Treatment consists of surgical excision, with
care being taken to completely remove any local irritant
that may still be present that would predispose to recurrence of the lesion.
In addition to an ulcerated fibroma, which in fact may
itself be a nearly healed or sclerosed pyogenic granuloma,
both peripheral ossifying fibroma and peripheral giant
cell granuloma must be considered in the differential diagnosis of pyogenic granuloma, because these lesions are
clinically indistinguishable.
Figure 28-3 Pyogenic granuloma arising from the inter-

Peripheral Ossifying Fibroma

soft to firm and is suggestive of an ulcerated fibroma.
Because of the pronounced vascularity of these lesions,
they often bleed easily when probed. A review of pyogenic granulomas of the oral cavity revealed a 65% to 70%
incidence of occurrence on the gingiva, most commonly
the maxillary anterior labial gingiva, followed by the lips,
tongue, buccal mucosa, palate, mucolabial or mucobuccal
fold, and alveolar mucosa of edentulous areas.10 In this
series, 27% of 46 patients were younger than 20 years of
age. Another review of 38 cases reported an age range of 5
to 75 years (mean age, 33 years), with the most frequent
site of occurrence also being on the gingiva (74%).10,11
Histologically, the pyogenic granuloma presents
as a remarkable proliferation of plump fibroblasts and

Peripheral ossifying fibroma is a benign reactive lesion
believed to be of periodontal ligament origin that occurs
exclusively on the gingiva. In the largest series of cases,
50% of the lesions were noted to occur in individuals bet­
ween 5 and 25 years of age, with the peak incidence at 13
years.12 The lesions were almost equally divided between
maxilla and mandible, with more than 80% of the lesions
in both jaws occurring anterior to the molar area.
Histologically, peripheral ossifying fibroma demonstrates a proliferation of plump fibroblasts in a characteristic stroma of delicate, interlacing collagen fibrils.
Osteoid and calcified material varying from dystrophic
calcification to spicules of lamellar bone may be found
in the lesion. The surface epithelium is often ulcerated.
Although simple surgical excision is the treatment of
choice, recurrences are not uncommon and were reported in two studies in 16% and 20% of cases, respectively.12,13 In a more recent study of 134 cases of peripheral
ossifying fibroma in patients aged 1 to 19 years, the overall

dental papilla between the maxillary central incisors. The
surface is lobulated with erythema and ulceration. There
was poor oral hygiene with heavy accumulation of plaque
on the lingual surfaces of the teeth.

606

Chapter 28

n

Tumors of the Oral Soft Tissues and Cysts and Tumors of Bone

recurrence rate was 8%. However, this was thought to
represent the minimum rate of recurrence, in that no attempt was made to determine how many patients with
or without recurrent lesions were followed clinically
and, if so, for how long.14

Peripheral Odontogenic Fibroma (WHO type)
Previously, the terms peripheral ossifying fibroma and peripheral odontogenic fibroma were used synonymously,
which introduced considerable confusion into the literature. To clarify the confusion, peripheral odontogenic fibroma
(World Health Organization [WHO] type) was proposed
to denote the rare peripheral counterpart of the central
odontogenic fibroma (WHO type), and peripheral ossifying
fibroma was proposed to be retained and used to denote
the relatively common reactive gingival lesion.15 Clinically, peripheral odontogenic fibroma (WHO type) must
be considered in the differential diagnosis of dome-shaped
or nodular, usually nonulcerated, growths on the gingiva.
Peripheral odontogenic fibroma (WHO type) is a rare
odontogenic tumor characterized by a fibrous or fibromyxomatous stroma containing varying numbers of
islands and strands of odontogenic epithelium. Cementum-like, bone-like, or dentinoid material may be present. Its age at presentation is strikingly similar to that of
the peripheral ossifying fibroma. Even though treatment
consists of local surgical excision, in one study recurrence
was noted in 7 of 18 cases for which follow-up information was obtained.16

Peripheral Giant Cell Granuloma
Peripheral giant cell granuloma, like the peripheral ossifying fibroma, is a lesion unique to the oral cavity,
occurring only on the gingiva. Unlike peripheral ossifying fibroma, however, it may occur on the alveolar
mucosa of edentulous areas. Like pyogenic granuloma
and peripheral ossifying fibroma, peripheral giant cell
granuloma may represent an unusual response to tissue
injury. It is distinguishable from pyogenic granuloma
and peripheral ossifying fibroma only on the basis of its
unique histomorphology, which is essentially identical
to that of central giant cell granuloma (discussed later
in this chapter). In a review of 720 cases, 33% were seen
in patients younger than 20 years of age, which concurs with the findings of another study in which 33 of
97 cases (34%) occurred in individuals between 5 and
15 years of age.17,18 There is a nearly 2:1 predilection
of females to males, with the mandible being involved
more often than the maxilla. Although it develops in
soft tissue, resorption of the subjacent alveolar bone
may occur. Also, while rare, cervical root resorption
may be seen in association with a peripheral giant cell
granuloma.19
The peripheral giant cell granuloma is best treated by
complete surgical excision, with care taken to excise it at
its base. Little tendency for recurrence has been noted.

NEUROFIBROMA AND NEUROFIBROMATOSIS
(VON RECKLINGHAUSEN DISEASE)

Neurofibroma is a benign neural neoplasm of Schwann
cell origin, several clinical forms of which are recognized.

The solitary neurofibroma may present in the skin or
oral mucous membranes as a soft tumor with a sessile or
pedunculated base. Some neurofibromas are diffuse, presenting as a soft, nonspecific tissue mass or swelling. The
presence of either solitary or diffuse neurofibromas does
not in itself herald the diagnosis of neurofibromatosis.
However, the presence of a third form, plexiform neurofibroma, is considered to be diagnostic of neurofibromatosis. Plexiform neurofibroma differs from either the
solitary or diffuse forms in that it remains confined to the
perineurium, presenting as a tortuous, fusiform enlargement of the nerve.
As familial cancer syndromes, there are three recognized forms of neurofibromatosis—neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1), neurofibromatosis type 2 (NF2), and
schwannomatosis—­
with the most prominent common denominator of all three being the appearance of
Schwann cell–initiated tumorigenesis of the peripheral
nervous system.20 Because of its relative comparative
frequency of occurrence and frequency of oral and
cutaneous manifestations potentially evident to the
dental practitioner, only NF-1 will be discussed in this
chapter.
NF1, known as von Recklinghausen disease, is a relatively
common disorder showing autosomal-dominant inheritance with complete penetrance, variable clinical expressivity and pleiotropy, and age-dependent expression of
clinical manifestations. It occurs in approximately 1 in
3000 live births, with an equal gender predilection. The
NF1 gene is carried on chromosome 17 and has tumorsuppressor function, with the tumor-suppressing properties of neurofibromin (the NF1 gene product) being impaired or lost due to mutation in the gene. It is said to
be the most common single-gene disorder to affect the
human nervous system. The criterion for diagnosis is the
presence of two or more of the following features: six or
more café-au-lait spots (1.5 cm or larger in postpubertal
individuals, 0.5 cm or larger in prepubertal individuals),
two or more neurofibromas of any type or one or more
plexiform neurofibromas, freckling in the axillary or inguinal region, optic glioma, two or more pigmented iris
hamartomas or Lisch nodules, dysplasia of the sphenoid
bone or dysplasia or thinning of long bone cortex with or
without pseudoarthrosis, and a first-degree relative with
NF1.
As previously noted, the NF1 gene is a tumor-suppressor gene, and thus patients with NF1 are at increased risk
of developing benign and malignant tumors. Neurofibromatosis is a progressive condition, with different presentations occurring at specific times and some complications worsening over time. While cutaneous or dermal
neurofibromas are considered one of the characteristic
features of this disorder and may appear in childhood,
they more commonly develop in teenagers or adults. Although malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors may
be noted in pediatric patients with NF1, they usually develop in adulthood and are heralded by the presence of
pain or rapid growth arising in a plexiform or deep nodular neurofibroma.21
Intraorally, neurofibromas may present as nodular
lesions on either a sessile or pedunculated base, often

Chapter 28

n

with a normal, pink mucosal color (Fig. 28-4); as a diffuse, ill-defined swelling with a firm to doughy consistency; or as a diffuse, noncompressible mass. They are
most frequently found on the tongue and buccal mucosa but occasionally present as intraosseous lesions,
which occur most commonly in the posterior mandible
(Fig. 28-5).
The most common radiographic findings include
an increase in bone density, enlarged mandibular foramen, lateral bowing of the mandibular ramus, increase
in dimensions of the coronoid notch, and decrease in
the mandibular angle.22 Computed tomographic scans
may reveal findings such as enlargement of the mandibular foramen and concavity of the medial surface of
the ramus.
A great deal of histomorphologic variability may be
noted, from relatively circumscribed but nonencapsulated solitary neurofibromas to diffuse and plexiform neurofibromas. Diffuse neurofibromas are characterized by
infiltrative growth pattern along connective tissue planes
and its Wagner and Meissner tactile corpuscles. Plexiform
neurofibromas are characterized by fascicles of neoplastic

Figure 28-4 A 14-year-old boy undergoing orthodontic

therapy was referred for evaluation of gingival hyperplasia
on the lingual surfaces of the maxillary incisors and a firm
swelling on the palatal side of tooth number 9 that was
found after biopsy to be a neurofibroma (arrow).

Tumors of the Oral Soft Tissues and Cysts and Tumors of Bone

Schwann cells and collagen within a myxoid matrix that
is confined to the perineurium. Mast cells are common
findings within neurofibromas.
Solitary lesions are best treated by simple surgical excision and show little propensity for recurrence. Surgical
excision of diffuse neurofibromas is difficult because of
their diffuse, infiltrating nature. Plexiform neurofibromas
are also difficult to treat in that they have a tendency to
grow along the course of a nerve, which results in frequent recurrences. It has been noted that (1) children
younger than 10 years of age, (2) children with plexiform
neurofibromas in the head, face, and neck, and (3) those
with tumors that cannot be almost completely removed
are at particular risk for progression of their disease.23

HEMANGIOMA
Vascular anomalies are commonly encountered lesions
of childhood and may be divided into hemangiomas and
vascular malformations.24 Hemangiomas are differentiated
from vascular malformations since they demonstrate proliferative activity, whereas vascular malformations grow
commensurately with the child.25 The hemangioma is a
common, benign, vasoformative tumor that frequently occurs in the head and neck in children. It is generally believed
to be hamartomatous rather than neoplastic in nature. Most
hemangiomas are either present at birth or develop within
the first year of life. It is believed that even those lesions that
do not appear until adult life may have been present but
not clinically evident until they began to enlarge.
Hemangiomas arising in the oral soft tissues most
commonly affect the tongue, lips, and buccal mucosa.
Clinically, they may be flat or raised and may vary from
deep red to blue. Their histologic classification is based on
the size of the vascular spaces. A capillary hemangioma
is the most common type and is composed of many tiny
capillaries with a pronounced endothelial cell proliferation. The cellular or juvenile hemangioma consists principally of a proliferation of endothelial cells with only
small numbers of discernible capillaries. A cavernous
hemangioma is characterized by large, blood-filled sinusoidal spaces lined by endothelial cells and supported by
a fibrous stroma. Hemangiomas may also occur centrally
within the mandible or maxilla.

Figure 28-5 Neurofibroma involving the molar region and ramus of the right mandible in a child with neurofibromatosis.

(Courtesy Dr. Robin Cotton.)

607

608

Chapter 28

n

Tumors of the Oral Soft Tissues and Cysts and Tumors of Bone

Vascular malformations most frequently involve the
skin but also may affect visceral organs or bone. They may
be categorized as fast-flow lesions and slow-flow lesions.26
Fast-flow lesions include arterial malformations, arteriovenous malformations, and arteriovenous fistulas. Slowflow lesions include capillary, lymphatic, and venous
malformations. Vascular malformations of the mandible
(i.e., arteriovenous malformations or central hemangioma of the mandible, as they are sometimes called) are potentially dangerous in that a biopsy or simple event such
as a tooth extraction may lead to a catastrophic hemorrhage, possibly leading to death.27 These lesions may be
asymptomatic, picked up only as incidental radiographic
findings, or they may cause pain and swelling. They are
typically well-circumscribed radiolucent lesions with no
characteristic radiographic pattern to denote their underlying nature. Occasionally, loose or displaced teeth may
be seen. Arteriovenous malformations bear a radiographic
similarity to any number of other relatively well-circumscribed unilocular or multilocular radiolucent lesions in
the jaws. Therefore it is advisable to aspirate such lesions
with a needle before surgery or dental extraction, to avoid
the possibility of severe blood loss or exsanguination
caused by the inability to control the resultant profuse
bleeding. The treatment for hemangiomas varies with the
type, location, and size of the lesion involved. Many lesions spontaneously involute with age, especially those
that are noted early and cease growing during the first
year of life. Others require no treatment because of their
small size and innocuous nature.

LYMPHANGIOMA
Lymphangiomas are relatively rare benign congenital tumors of the lymphatic system. Even though the embryologic events leading to their development remain unclear,
they are thought to arise as a benign hamartomatous proliferation of sequestered lymphatic rests. Forming along
tissue planes or penetrating adjacent tissue, they become
canalized and, in the congenital absence of venous drainage, accumulate fluid. The head and neck region is most
commonly involved, with up to two thirds of cases being
present at birth and as many as 90% being present by the
second year of life; a small number may not be manifest
for a number of years.28
Lymphangiomas are classified histologically into capillary lymphangiomas, cavernous lymphangiomas, and
cystic hygroma. Capillary lymphangioma is typically composed of a proliferation of thin-walled, endothelium-lined
channels primarily devoid of erythrocytes. Cavernous
lymphangioma is characterized by the presence of dilated
sinusoidal endothelium-lined vascular channels devoid
of erythrocytes. Cystic hygroma is a macroscopic form of
the cavernous lymphangioma, with large sinusoidal spaces
lined with a single layer of endothelial cells that form multilocular cystic masses of varying sizes. Lymphangiomas of
the oral soft tissues occur most commonly on the tongue,
lips, and buccal mucosa. They are often elevated and nodular in appearance and may have the same color as the
surrounding mucosa. Treatment is generally not indicated
for small oral mucosal lymphangiomas; partial or complete
spontaneous involution is occasionally noted.

Although cystic hygromas may be found in the oral
cavity in sites such as the tongue, they most frequently appear as a mass in the neck, occasionally extending
into the mediastinum. Most commonly presenting as a
slow-growing asymptomatic soft-tissue mass, however,
they may undergo sudden enlargement in the presence of
trauma, inflammation, internal hemorrhage, or respiratory tract infection. Large cystic hygromas may encroach on
the airway and esophagus, leading to difficulty in swallowing and even airway obstruction.

CONGENITAL EPULIS (GINGIVAL GRANULAR
CELL LESION) OF THE NEWBORN
Congenital epulis of the newborn is a rare lesion of uncertain histogenesis that occurs exclusively in newborn infants, chiefly on the maxillary anterior alveolar ridge and
less commonly on the mandibular anterior alveolar ridge.
Although usually solitary lesions, they may be multiple,
most often affecting both the maxilla and mandible, although rare simultaneous occurrence of lesions on the
maxillary anterior alveolar ridge and tongue have been
reported. Clinically, the lesion presents at birth as a pink,
smooth to lobulated, pedunculated mass that may vary
in size from a few millimeters to more than 7 cm in diameter. More than 90% of cases occur in girls (Fig. 28-6).
While typically considered to be a lesion of uncertain
histogenesis, immunohistochemical studies have revealed strong and diffuse cytoplasmic staining for neuron-specific enolase and vimentin, which suggests that
the congenital epulis may be derived from uncommitted
nerve-related mesenchymal cells.29
Although histologic similarities to the granular cell
tumor have long been noted, the epithelium over the
congenital epulis is generally thin without rete ridge formation, whereas the granular cell tumor is characterized
by pseudoepitheliomatous hyperplasia of the overlying
epithelium. Distinct differences are obvious on both ultrastructural and immunohistochemical evaluation; one
differentiating factor between the congenital epulis and
granular cell tumors is the absence of S100 in the former
and its presence in the latter lesion.30

Figure 28-6 Congenital epulis of the newborn. (Courtesy

Dr. Robin Cotton.)

Chapter 28

n

Although the clinical presence of congenital epulis
may frighten parents, it ceases to grow following birth
and is entirely benign, with some cases undergoing spontaneous involution. The usual treatment is simple surgical
excision, with care taken not to interfere with the developing dentition. As there have been some reports of spontaneous regression of lesions treated conservatively (i.e.,
nonsurgical management), it has been concluded that,
in lesions less than 2 cm in its largest dimension, where
there is no interference with respiration or feeding, that
nonsurgical management to avoid general anesthesia in a
neonate, for a benign lesion which will not recur, should
be considered.31 There is no propensity for recurrence
with excision, even in those cases in which the lesion is
incompletely removed.

MUCOCELE
Mucocele, or mucus retention phenomenon as it is often
called, is a salivary gland lesion of traumatic origin that
forms when the main duct of a minor salivary gland is
torn, with subsequent extravasation of mucus into the
fibrous connective tissue so that a cystlike cavity is produced. The wall of this cavity is formed by compressed
bundles of collagen fibrils, and its lumen contains inspissated mucin.
Mucoceles are noted to occur most commonly on the
lower lip, with the floor of the mouth and buccal mucosa
being the next most frequent sites of involvement. Mucoceles are only rarely seen on the upper lip, retromolar
pad, or palate. Although they may occur at any age, including at birth, they tend to be noted most frequently in
the second and third decades of life. No obvious gender
predilection is noted.
A mucocele may be located either in the superficial
mucosa, where it is typically seen as a fluid-filled vesicle
or blister (Fig. 28-7), or deep within the connective tissue,
where it is seen as a fluctuant nodule with the overlying mucosa normal in color. There may be spontaneous
drainage of the inspissated mucin with temporary resolution, especially in superficial lesions, and subsequent
recurrence as the mucous saliva continues to drain into

Tumors of the Oral Soft Tissues and Cysts and Tumors of Bone

609

the connective tissue at the site of the torn duct. Fibrosis
may be observed over the surface of a long-standing lesion where chronic periodic drainage has taken place.
Treatment is by surgical excision, with removal of the
involved accessory salivary gland. Marsupialization will
only result in recurrence.

RANULA
Ranula is the clinical term for a mucocele occurring on
the floor of the mouth after trauma to components of
the sublingual glands. Two varieties of ranula exist: cystic
(mucus retention cyst) and pseudocystic (mucus retention
phenomenon or mucocele). In the cystic type, there is
partial obstruction of the distal end of a sublingual gland
duct that results in a small epithelial lined cyst usually less
than 1 cm in diameter. However, the pseudocystic type,
which is more common, forms as a result of extravasation
of mucus into the fibrous connective tissue after a tear in
a sublingual gland duct and, as in the case of a mucocele,
arises as a result of the escape of mucus into the adjacent
connective tissue. The clinical term plunging ranula is used
when extravasated mucus dissects through the mylohyoid muscle and along the fascial planes of the neck, producing a swelling evident in the floor of the mouth.
Ranulas are typically slowly enlarging, fluctuant
masses occurring on one side of the midline of the floor of
the mouth and are so named because of their resemblance
to the bloated underside of a frog’s belly (Fig. 28-8). Lesions are usually treated by marsupialization, with occasional recurrence being noted. Chronic recurrence may
require excision of the entire involved gland.

BENIGN TUMORS OF BONE
BENIGN FIBRO-OSSEOUS LESIONS OF THE JAWS
Benign fibro-osseous lesions of the jaws comprise a diverse group of lesions sharing, as a common denominator, the replacement of normal bone architecture by a
benign fibrocellular stroma containing varying amounts
of mineralized material, including woven bone, lamellar bone, and curvilinear trabeculae or spherical calcifications. The mineralized material may histologically

Figure 28-7 Mucocele on the lower lip. Notice the small

white area of fibrosis where the mucocele has spontaneously drained with healing on the roof of the lesion, only to
have the mucocele recur.

Figure 28-8 Ranula on the floor of the mouth (arrow).

610

Chapter 28

n

Tumors of the Oral Soft Tissues and Cysts and Tumors of Bone

Figure 28-9 Panelipse radiograph of a child

with fibrous dysplasia showing a uniformly radiodense lesion crossing the midline with poorly
defined borders blending into the surrounding
bone. Notice the displacement of the developing teeth.

resemble bone and/or cementum. Because of the similar
histomorphology of these lesions, diagnosis is best made
on the basis of distinguishing clinical and radiographic
as well as histologic features. This group of lesions includes fibrous dysplasia (considered a developmental
process), reactive or dysplastic processes grouped under
the collective term cemento-osseous dysplasia, and cemento-ossifying fibroma, which is a benign neoplasm.
Because of the frequency of occurrence of fibrous dysplasia and cemento-ossifying fibroma of bone in the jaws
of children and the relative lack of occurrence of the
cemento-osseous dysplasia group of lesions in this age
group, only the former two are discussed here. Owing
to the commonality of the histopathologic features of
these disorders, a definitive diagnosis of any of them is
dependent on evaluation of a combination of the clinical, histopathologic, and imaging features taken together, not just the microscopic features alone.32

FIBROUS DYSPLASIA
Fibrous dysplasia of the jaws is a distinct clinicopathologic
entity that is generally considered to be a nonneoplastic
developmental lesion of bone. One of the disease entities
included in the spectrum of benign fibro-osseous lesions
of the jaws, it is distinguished from the others by its clinical and radiographic features. In the child and adolescent,
it has most often been confused with the cemento-ossifying fibroma, which is a benign neoplasm believed to be of
periodontal ligament origin. Fibrous dysplasia is caused
by a somatic activating mutation of the alpha subunit of
the G protein receptor (Gs-alpha) that ultimately results
in abnormalities of osteoblast differentiation and therefore abnormal bone.
The two forms of fibrous dysplasia are (1) the relatively
rare polyostotic form of the disease and (2) the considerably more common monostotic fibrous dysplasia. A severe
form of polyostotic fibrous dysplasia called McCune-­
Albright syndrome is associated with café-au-lait macules
on the skin and a variety of endocrine disorders, most commonly precocious puberty, but also including Cushing’s
syndrome, hyperthyroidism, growth hormone excess, etc.
Monostotic fibrous dysplasia tends to develop early in
life, with lesions being detected late in the first and early

in the second decades.32 It is seen with approximately
equal frequency in males and females, with the maxilla
being involved more frequently than the mandible. Maxillary involvement can be an especially serious form of
the disease, frequently involving contiguous bones across
suture lines, including the maxillary sinus, floor of the
orbit, sphenoid bone, base of the skull, and occiput. This
form of the disease has been called craniofacial fibrous
dysplasia and is not truly monostotic in its nature.
The most common clinical manifestation is a painless
swelling of the jaws characterized by a smooth, uniform,
fusiform expansion of the involved alveolar ridge. Obliteration of the mucobuccal or mucolabial fold is a common feature, with the overlying mucosa being normal in
appearance. When the maxilla is involved, elevation of
the eye may be noted.
Radiographically, maxillary lesions most often show a
ground-glass appearance of the bone, whereas mandibular lesions usually show either a ground-glass or a mixed
radiolucent-radiopaque appearance (Fig. 28-9). Their borders are typically poorly defined, except for the anterior
portion of some maxillary lesions, which may appear to
be well-circumscribed. Divergence of roots may be noted,
and in children in whom developing permanent teeth are
present, there may be displacement of teeth with noneruption (see Fig. 28-9). Other potential distinguishing radiographic findings include superior displacement of the
mandibular canal and a fingerprint bone pattern as well
as displacement of the maxillary sinus cortex, alteration
of the lamina dura because of the abnormal bone pattern,
and narrowing of the periodontal ligament space.33
Histologically, there is a benign fibrous stroma with
bony trabeculae varying in appearance from woven to lamellar, proportionate to the relative maturity of the lesion.
Monostotic fibrous dysplasia of the jaws is typically
a slow-growing, painless, progressive enlargement of
bone whose growth pattern often stabilizes with time as
maturation in skeletal growth is reached. Conservative
therapy is indicated because of the benign nature of this
lesion and because surgically the margins are ill-defined
and blend into the surrounding normal bone. Surgery,
chiefly in the form of osseous recontouring, should be
considered only when there is functional or significant

Chapter 28

n

Tumors of the Oral Soft Tissues and Cysts and Tumors of Bone

611

cosmetic deformity and then usually only after stabilization of the disease process. Because this is a benign
lesion of bone, radiation therapy is contraindicated
because of the possibility of development of a postradiation sarcoma in the area. In symptomatic cases in
which pain control and disease stabilization are needed,
bisphosphonates have been used, resulting in pain relief and, in a number of patients, disease stabilization as
well.34,35 Little, however, is known about the long-term
skeletal effects of childhood bisphosphonate use, and it
has been recommended that its use be limited to experienced pediatric units.34

CEMENTO-OSSIFYING FIBROMA
Cemento-ossifying fibroma is a benign neoplasm of bone
grouped with fibrous dysplasia and other benign nonodontogenic tumors under the broad category of benign
fibro-osseous lesions of the jaws. As with other benign
fibro-osseous lesions, it is characterized histologically by
a benign fibrocellular stroma, with formation of variable
amounts of woven-appearing bone, lamellar bone, and
spherical to annular to amorphous cementum-like calcifications. Although it was traditionally considered to be an
odontogenic neoplasm of periodontal ligament origin affecting the tooth-bearing areas of the jaws, the occurrence
of histologically identical neoplasms in the temporal,
frontal, ethmoid, and sphenoid bones leaves this concept
in doubt. Although there is a predilection for occurrence
in the third and fourth decades of life, cemento-ossifying
fibroma is found with some frequency in patients younger than 20 years of age. The mandible is involved more
often than the maxilla, with the molar and premolar regions of the mandible being the most common sites of
occurrence.
Cemento-ossifying fibroma may be entirely asymptomatic, being discovered on routine radiographic examination, or may present as a painless expansion of
bone. Radiographically, it is a well-circumscribed lesion,
often with a well-demarcated sclerotic border (Fig. 2810). Beyond this, the radiographic features are quite
variable.36 It most frequently presents as a unilocular
radiolucency with or without radiopaque foci, which
may be superimposed over teeth, be interposed between
contiguous teeth, or reside in edentulous regions. Aggressively expansile lesions, with or without radiopaque
foci, and multilocular expansile lesions may also be
noted. Tooth displacement or divergence of roots of
teeth and/or root resorption may be seen with varing
degrees of frequency, with tooth displacement or root
divergence being reported in 17% to 33% of cases and
root resorption being seen between 11% and 44% of the
time.36,37 Cortical thinning and bony expansion with
clinical deformity have been reported in as many as 91%
of cases.
Initial treatment is by enucleation or curettage where
possible, with the frequency of recurrence varying from
0% to 28%.36,38

Figure 28-10 Ossifying fibroma in a 10-year-old boy. The ra-

diograph shows a well-circumscribed, expansile, radiolucent
lesion with thinning of the inferior cortical plate of bone.
(Courtesy Dr. Mark L. Bernstein.)

ossifying fibroma, encompasses two distinct clinicopathologic variants of ossifying fibroma involving the craniofacial bones: trabecular JOF (TrJOF) and psammomatoid
JOF (PsJOF).
The majority of cases of TrJOF occur in children and
adolescents. Both maxilla and mandible may be involved,
with the maxilla being involved slightly more frequently.32 Occurrence in extragnathic locations is extremely
rare.32 The reported mean age ranges from 8.5 to 12 years
(range, 2 to 12 years).39 The growth of TrJOF has been
characterized as painless, progressive, and sometimes rapid expansion of the affected area.32,39 Radiographically,
they may show a mixed radiolucent radiopaque appearance and are expansile, fairly well-defined, and may present with cortical thinning and perforation.
PsJOF occurs predominantly in the sinonasal and orbital bones in children, with a mean age range of 16 to
33 years (range, 3 months to 72 years).32,39 Clinically, it
presents as bony expansion of the orbital or nasal bones
or sinuses, and radiographically, it is seen as a round,
well-defined, sometimes corticated, osteolytic lesion with
cystic appearance.32
Aggressive growth was noted to occur in some cases of
both types of tumors, with a high recurrence rate after excision (30% to 56%). This has been postulated as likely due
to incomplete excision caused by the infiltrative nature of
the tumor borders.39 Even with this, it has been proposed
that, despite their similarities in biologic behavior, differences in histologic and clinical presentation as well as
sites of occurrence between PsJOF and TrJOF warrant their
separation into two distinct clinicopathologic entities.39

JUVENILE OSSIFYING FIBROMA

CENTRAL GIANT CELL GRANULOMA

The term juvenile ossifying fibroma (JOF), also known as
juvenile active ossifying fibroma and juvenile aggressive

First described in 1953 as giant-cell reparative granuloma, the central giant cell granuloma (CGCG) of the jaws

612

Chapter 28

n

Tumors of the Oral Soft Tissues and Cysts and Tumors of Bone

Figure 28-11 Central giant cell granuloma involving the

anterior mandible presenting radiographically as a multilocular, radiolucent lesion with expansion and thinning of
the cortical plates. Notice also the faint trabeculation within
the lesion.
is a relatively uncommon benign lesion of bone.40 It occurs most commonly during the first 30 years of life,
with more than 60% of lesions noted before 20 years
of age and nearly 50% occurring in patients younger
than 16 years of age. CGCG occurs more often in females than in males. It may be found in either jaw, but
the mandible is involved twice as often as the maxilla.
Although it was traditionally accepted that the majority
of lesions occur anterior to the first permanent molar,
a study of 80 cases of CGCG found that nearly 50% of
cases occurred in the molar, ramus, and tuberosity regions.41 Usually asymptomatic, CGCG may present with
aggressive growth, pain, and swelling. Radiographically,
CGCG may vary from a unilocular radiolucency to a
multilocular expansile bone-destructive lesion with displacement and noneruption of teeth, root resorption,
and cortical perforation (Fig. 28-11). Histologically,
CGCG is composed of a few to many monocyte-derived
multinucleated giant cells in a fibrous connective tissue stroma of ovoid to spindle shape, probably fibroblast-related, mesenchymal cells, and round monocytemacrophages. Prominent numbers of extravasated red
blood cells with associated hemosiderin pigment are
often scattered throughout the fibrous connective tissue. Varying amounts of osteoid and bony trabeculae
are also noted.
The pathogenesis of CGCG of the jaws remains unknown, with lesions, as a group, exhibiting features of
both reactive and neoplastic disease. There is also considerable discussion in the literature as to its relationship to
giant cell tumor of bone. It has been suggested by several
authors that CGCG and giant cell tumor of other bones
represent a spectrum of a single disease process, with the

differences in clinical behavior partially accounted for by
differences in age distribution and by the site of occurrence, among other factors.42,43,44
As originally described, CGCG was a rather indolent
process that yielded readily to therapy, with the therapeutic procedure of choice being surgical curettage.40 It
was subsequently reported that there is a range of biologic behavior of CGCGs, from quiescent to aggressive,
expansile bone-destructive lesions.45 Lesions in CGCG
have since been classified as nonaggressive and aggressive, based on their clinical presentation. Nonaggressive
lesions have a slow, asymptomatic growth without perforation of the cortical plate of bone or root resorption.
Features of aggressive lesions may include rapid growth,
expansion and/or perforation of the cortical plate of
bone with soft-tissue extension, pain, and root resorption.41,43-45 It has also been suggested that younger age at
presentation may be associated with more aggressive behavior. In one series, for example,43 recurrence developed
in 5 of the 25 patients for whom follow-up information
was available, with the average age of these 5 patients
being 11 years compared with an average age of 29 years
for patients without recurrence. In a study of 31 cases
of CGCG of the jaws in 29 patients, seven lesions demonstrated cortical perforation and soft-tissue extension.44
Lesions recurred in five cases, all of which showed microscopically confirmed cortical perforation at the time of
first occurrence.
Surgical curettage is the most commonly used therapy
for CGCG, although in aggressive cases resection may be
indicated. Although alternative treatments to surgical
curettage have been suggested, including injections of
corticosteroid, calcitonin, and interferon (INF-α) as well
as some others, a Cochrane review did not identify evidence from randomized controlled trials to support their
use.46,47 Radiation therapy is contraindicated.

ODONTOGENIC CYSTS
Odontogenic cysts are so named because it is believed
that they are derived from epithelium that arose from the
dental lamina during odontogenesis. They may be developmental or inflammatory in origin. Even though the
pathogenesis of the developmental types of odontogenic
cysts is not clearly understood, it is known that inflammatory cysts such as the periapical cyst (apical periodontal
cyst, radicular cyst) result from proliferation of epithelial
rests of Malassez secondary to inflammation from pulpal
necrosis of an associated tooth.48
Because of their relative potential for occurrence in the
pediatric dental population, four types of developmental odontogenic cysts—primordial cyst, dentigerous cyst,
eruption cyst, and odontogenic keratocyst (OKC, aka keratocystic odontogenic tumor or KOT)—are discussed in
this chapter. Odontogenic keratocyst (OKC/KOT) is also
discussed in relation to the nevoid basal cell carcinoma
syndrome (Gorlin syndrome).

PRIMORDIAL CYST
Traditionally, primordial cyst was considered to be an
uncommon type of odontogenic cyst, formed by cystic

Chapter 28

n

degeneration of the enamel organ (primordium) before
the formation of enamel or dentin. Primordial cysts are
usually asymptomatic and are most likely to be found on
routine radiographic examination. Although they begin
to evolve when the enamel organ is developing before the
formation of the enamel or dentin, they may not be noticed or become clinically evident for many years.
Radiographically, the primordial cyst may be a wellcircumscribed, unilocular- or multilocular-appearing radiolucent lesion in a location where a permanent tooth
failed to develop and where none has been extracted.
Such cysts are more commonly found in the third molar
region, but they may occur in any location where a permanent tooth would have formed.
Although more typically lined by nonkeratinizing,
stratified squamous odontogenic cyst-lining epithelium
with a fibrous connective tissue wall, primordial cyst may
present as a histologically distinct type of odontogenic
cyst, the odontogenic keratocyst. In one large series of cases, 60 of 135 (44.4%) primordial cysts were histologically
odontogenic keratocysts.49 Some authors have concluded that all primordial cysts are odontogenic keratocysts
and use the two terms synonymously. However, if one
takes into consideration that, in the study cited here, in
which greater than 55% of cysts that clinically and radiographically fit the traditional criteria for a primordial
cyst were not histologically odontogenic keratocysts, the
concept that the two terms are synonymous ignores the
histologic evidence to the contrary.
Appropriate treatment for the primordial cyst is surgical removal unless an extremely large bone-destructive lesion is present, in which case cystotomy with placement
of a polyethylene drain followed by cystectomy when the
cyst has reached a manageable size is the treatment of
choice. If the lesion is found histologically to be an odontogenic keratocyst, the chance for recurrence is high (see
later in this chapter).

DENTIGEROUS CYST
Dentigerous cyst, the most common type of odontogenic cyst, is found in association with the crown of an
impacted, embedded, or otherwise unerupted tooth. The
incidence of dentigerous cysts is reportedly 1.44 per 100
unerupted teeth.50 Even though the dentigerous cyst is
considered to be a developmental type of odontogenic cyst, it has been speculated that some may have an
inflammatory origin from a source such as periapical
inflammation from a nonvital deciduous tooth.51 Typically, dentigerous cysts are asymptomatic and found on
routine radiographic examination, appearing as a welldefined unilocular or multilocular radiolucent lesion.
The lesion may vary in size from one in which the differentiation from an enlarged dental follicle is somewhat arbitrary (a pericoronal radiolucency of 2.5 mm or greater
from the crown of the tooth has been generally accepted
as differentiating a dentigerous cyst from a dental follicle)48 to a large, bone-destructive lesion that may resorb
the roots of primary teeth, cause the divergence of or
completely displace permanent teeth, and produce large
areas of bone destruction in either the mandible or the
maxilla (Fig. 28-12).

Tumors of the Oral Soft Tissues and Cysts and Tumors of Bone

613

Figure 28-12 A dentigerous cyst in an 8-year-old girl associ-

ated with the developing maxillary central incisor with bone
destruction and expansion, as well as displacement of the
lateral incisor.

In addition to its potential for bone destruction and
because of the multipotential nature of this epithelium
derived from the dental lamina, several entities may arise
in or be associated with the wall of a dentigerous cyst.
For example, 8.5% of cysts that clinically appear as dentigerous cysts have been found histologically to be odontogenic keratocysts.49 Although relatively uncommon in
children and adolescents, it is believed that the majority
of ameloblastomas in this age group are associated with
dentigerous cysts, with 50% to 80% of cases of cystic ameloblastoma appearing radiographically as dentigerous
cysts.53-55 It has been concluded, based on histopathologic features, that these ameloblastomatous changes occurred in a preexisting cyst rather than representing cystic
degeneration of a solid tumor.54 Mucus-secreting cells
and, more significantly, mucoepidermoid carcinoma may
also arise in the wall of a dentigerous cyst.
The treatment of choice for dentigerous cysts is surgical removal. Large bone-destructive lesions, however,
are best treated initially by cystotomy and the placement
of a polyethylene drain in the lesion, which facilitates
shrinkage with healing around the periphery to the point
where the lesion becomes amenable to more simple surgical removal. Because of the potential for occurrence of
an odontogenic keratocyst or the development of an ameloblastoma or, more rarely, mucoepidermoid carcinoma,
all such lesions, when removed, should be submitted for
histopathologic evaluation.

ERUPTION CYST OR ERUPTION HEMATOMA
An eruption cyst or eruption hematoma is a type of dentigerous cyst associated with an erupting primary or permanent tooth in its soft-tissue phase after erupting through
bone. The lesion is usually a translucent, smooth, painless
swelling over the erupting tooth. If bleeding occurs into
the cystic space, it may appear blue to blue-black and is
then called an eruption hematoma. In most cases no treatment is indicated because the tooth usually erupts into
the oral cavity undelayed and in a normal fashion.

614

Chapter 28

n

Tumors of the Oral Soft Tissues and Cysts and Tumors of Bone

ODONTOGENIC KERATOCYST (KERATOCYSTIC
ODONTOGENIC TUMOR)
The odontogenic keratocyst is a distinct clinicopathologic
entity with a clearly identifiable histologic appearance.
Clinically it is characterized by a high rate of recurrence
after treatment and by the potential to become an aggressive, bone-destructive lesion. In a review of 312 cases, the
peak incidence was found to be in the second and third
decades of life, with 17% occurring before 20 years of
age (only two cases were noted in children younger than
10 years of age).49 The mandible is involved twice as frequently as the maxilla, with the most common site of origin being the mandibular third molar region and ramus
of the mandible, followed by the maxillary third molar
region, mandibular first and second molar area, maxillary
canine area, and mandibular premolar region. Half of the
patients were symptomatic, with swelling and drainage
being the most common clinical findings.
Radiographically, odontogenic keratocyst may be a
unilocular or multilocular lesion, almost always with a
well-defined sclerotic border (Fig. 28-13). Tooth displacement, particularly of unerupted teeth, root resorption,
root divergence, and extrusion of erupted teeth may be
seen. Although radiographic evaluation typically includes
a panoramic radiograph, in the case of large lesions, especially those in the maxilla, computed tomography studies
should be performed preoperatively to accurately define
margins and soft-tissue extension that may be present.
The histologic appearance is pathognomonic. The lesion has a thin, generally uniform lining epithelium,
usually 6 to 10 cells thick, with palisading and hyperchromasia of the basal layer of cells and a corrugated parakeratin layer. Often parakeratotic squames are shed into the
lumen of the cyst cavity.

Occasionally, a cyst is lined by orthokeratin with a subjacent granular cell layer. These cysts have been termed
orthokeratinized odontogenic cysts and should be differentiated clinically from odontogenic keratocyst, because
orthokeratinized odontogenic cysts show little clinical
aggressiveness and rarely recur.56
There is no uniform agreement as to the most appropriate method of treatment of odontogenic keratocysts.
Recommendations vary from enucleation, with or without adjunctive therapy such as application of Carnoy solution, to marsupialization or decompression, to marginal
or segmental resection. This is partly because of their
variable clinical presentation, which includes differences in size and the multilocular nature of many odontogenic keratocysts, and partly because of their benign
nature coupled with the high frequency of recurrence.
A review of 22 reports citing 1592 cases of odontogenic
keratocysts revealed a recurrence rate varying from 3%
to 62% and an average rate of recurrence of 30.8%.57
Seventy percent of recurrences have been shown to take
place within 5 years of treatment.58 Although these lesions should be surgically excised, enucleation is difficult
because the cyst lining is often extremely thin and friable, and disruption of the epithelial lining in the resected
specimen may be a primary determinant of recurrence.59
It has been shown that odontogenic keratocysts that are
completely enucleated recur significantly less often than
those removed piecemeal.60 Enucleation followed by the
application of Carnoy solution and decompression followed by enucleation have been associated with low recurrence rates and resulted in significantly less morbidity
than resection.61 Alternatively, the radiograph in Figure
28-14 shows a large odontogenic keratocyst in which
decompression was performed with placement of a

Figure 28-13 An odontogenic keratocyst in a

9-year-old girl involving the angle and ramus
of the left mandible with displacement of the
developing second and third molar teeth.
(Courtesy Dr. Steven Reubel.)

Figure 28-14 Same patient as in Figure 28-12,

9 months after marsupialization and placement
of a drain. Notice the shrinkage of the cyst
with bone fill in the area. Notice also inferior
displacement of the inferior alveolar nerve.
(Courtesy Dr. Steven Reubel.)

Chapter 28

n

polyethylene drain, followed by cystectomy as the lesion
became more surgically manageable.
Hence, as pointed out in a recent systematic review
of the recurrence rate for OKCs as related to treatment
modalities, there is currently no high-quality evidence
available to evaluate recurrence rates relative to treatment types, leaving the most optimal treatment type in
doubt.62
Patients with documented or suspected nevoid basal
cell carcinoma syndrome have a higher rate of recurrence
than patients without the syndrome.60,63

NEVOID BASAL CARCINOMA (GORLIN)
SYNDROME
Nevoid basal carcinoma syndrome is a trait with autosomal-dominant inheritance with complete penetrance
and remarkably variable expressivity.64 It is caused by a
mutation of the patched (PTCH1) gene, which is thought
to be crucial for proper embryonic development and
for tumor suppression. Traditionally characterized by a
symptom complex of multiple basal cell carcinomas of
the skin, odontogenic keratocysts, and rib abnormalities (bifid, fused, or splayed ribs), a variety of other abnormalities may accompany this disorder. Patients may
have characteristic facies with cranial enlargement,
frontal and parietal bossing with overdevelopment of
the supraorbital ridges, hypertelorism, and a broad nasal root and mild mandibular prognathism. Calcification of the falx cerebri is evident radiographically in the
majority of adult patients. In addition to the basal cell
carcinomas, palmar and plantar pits and epidermal cysts
of the skin are commonly seen. Congenital malformations such as cleft lip and cleft palate and polydactyly or
syndactyly may be present. Spina bifida occulta of the
cervical or thoracic vertebrae may occur, and marfanoid
habitus may be seen. A variety of benign and malignant
neoplasms have been reported to occur, including medulloblastoma, meningioma, ovarian fibroma, and fetal
rhabdomyoma.64 Neurologic abnormalities, including
cognitive disabilities, may be noted, and some patients
may be hyporesponsive to parathyroid hormone. Because
of the association of the odontogenic keratocyst with
the basal cell nevus syndrome, all patients with single
or multiple odontogenic keratocysts should be evaluated
medically with this condition in mind. This is especially
true when an odontogenic keratocyst is found in a young
patient because the median age of appearance is younger
in syndromic than in nonsyndromic patients.64 Also, as
previously stated, there is an apparent increase in the rate
of recurrence of odontogenic keratocysts in patients with
the syndrome.

ODONTOGENIC TUMORS
The odontogenic tumors are so named because of their
presumed origin from the tissues derived from the developing odontogenic elements—that is, epithelium ultimately derived developmentally from the dental lamina
and/or ectomesenchymally derived mesenchymal cells.
The word tumor is used in its broadest sense, which here
includes neoplastic and hamartomatous processes.

Tumors of the Oral Soft Tissues and Cysts and Tumors of Bone

615

AMELOBLASTOMA
Ameloblastoma, the most common odontogenic neoplasm, is an aggressive, benign odontogenic neoplasm of
ectodermal origin. Usually an asymptomatic lesion, its
initial presentation may be facial swelling. It may present
with symptoms of pain and occasionally with lip/facial
numbness. Ameloblastoma may be discovered on routine radiographic evaluation or may show features such
as bony expansion, mobility, or divergence of teeth. The
average age of patients with ameloblastoma is approximately 36 years, with more than 80% of the lesions occuring in the mandible and more than 70% occurring in
the molar-ramus area.
At first glance, with the average age of occurrence of
ameloblastomas in the fourth decade of life, the discussion
of this entity in a pediatric context would not appear to
be particularly relevant to this chapter. In 1977 however,
the unicystic ameloblastoma was described, which was
thought to be a prognostically distinct entity.65 In the 20
patients studied, the average age was 21 years, with half of
patients being younger than 20 years. Clinically and radiographically, the lesions were described as having the features of a nonneoplastic cyst, with the majority mimicking
dentigerous cysts. A critical review of 193 cases of unicystic
ameloblastoma in the literature found that the mean age
at the time of diagnosis of unicystic ameloblastoma was
most closely related to one clinical feature: the presence
of an impacted tooth. Cases associated with an impacted
tooth have been termed the dentigerous type and those
not associated with an impacted tooth the nondentigerous type. The mean age at diagnosis of the dentigerous
variant was 16.5 years, whereas that of the nondentigerous type was 35.2 years.66 A review of the literature of ameloblastoma in children in Western societies from 1970,
when the histologic criteria for ameloblastoma were welldefined,67 through 2001 revealed the average age of occurrence to be 14.3 years.68 There is a strong predilection for
mandibular involvement, particularly in the molar-ramus
region.68,69,70 Of interest is that when literature from Africa
was reviewed, while the average ages (i.e., 14.7 years) were
essentially identical to those in Western countries, unicystic ameloblastoma accounted for only 19.5% of cases,
and there was an increased frequency of occurrence in the
mandibular symphysis (44.2%). A similar trend has been
reported in children and adolescents in one report from
China: the average age of occurrence (14.8 years) was again
essentially identical, with a strong predilection for occurrence in the mandible (96.6%), and historically the solid
type predominated over the unicystic type (63% vs 37%).71
Radiographically, ameloblastomas may present as either unilocular or multilocular radiolucent lesions, with
or without bony expansion. Cystic-appearing spaces may
be compartmentalized by separate, distinct septa of bone.
Unicystic ameloblastoma occurs almost exclusively in the
mandible, predominantly in the posterior part. Although
most commonly found in association with the crowns of
impacted teeth, unicystic ameloblastomas may be seen in
interradicular, periapical, or edentulous regions.
Histologically, they are distinguished by their resemblance to the enamel organ. Regardless of age or location,

616

Chapter 28

n

Tumors of the Oral Soft Tissues and Cysts and Tumors of Bone

ameloblastomas demonstrate, singly or in combination, a
variety of distinct histologic patterns. They are frequently
characterized by discrete islands of neoplastic odontogenic epithelium with a peripheral layer of columnar to
cuboidal epithelial cells that are palisaded in their appearance, with polarization of the nuclei away from the basement membrane. The central portions of these islands of
neoplastic odontogenic epithelium are composed of cells
that resemble the stellate reticulum. In some lesions these
central areas may take on an acanthomatous or granular
appearance. The plexiform pattern is the one most frequently encountered in the pediatric age group, with arrangement of tumor cells as a network of interconnecting
strands of cells. An important histologic finding in the
unicystic form, other than the observation of ameloblastic change in the cyst lining itself, is the presence of a
significant luminal and/or mural component characterized by a proliferation of ameloblastic odontogenic epithelium into the lumen of the cyst, the fibrous cyst wall,
or both. Mural invasion of the cyst wall portends a higher
risk of recurrence for this lesion.
Therapy is by surgical removal, the method of which
varies according to the location and clinical and radiographic extent of the lesion. Although a recurrence rate
of 55% to 90% has been found for ameloblastomas of
all types that have been treated by curettage, it has been
believed that the cystic form, the type found most commonly in children, potentially carried a lower potential
for recurrence.55,69 More recent studies, however, have
shown significant potential for recurrence after conservative treatment, not dissimilar to that of conventional ameloblastoma, with the recommendation being made for
more aggressive therapy than has been recommended in
the past.72

frequently causes a painless swelling exhibiting slow but
progressive growth.
AOTs occur most commonly in the second decade of
life. Nearly 70% of patients are younger than 20 years of
age, and more than 50% of cases occur in the teenage
years. Females are involved twice as often as males, and
the intraosseous lesions have been noted to occur nearly
twice as frequently in the maxilla as in the mandible, with
a noticeable predilection for occurrence in the canine and
incisor regions. The rare peripheral type is found almost
entirely in the anterior maxillary region. While it presents
as a peripheral lesion, there has been agreement from the
beginning that it is an erupted AOT, forming when an
associated tooth erupts into the gingiva, allowing for its
soft-tissue presentation.76-79
The most common radiographic finding is that of a
unilocular radiolucent lesion, which, as previously stated,
may appear radiographically as a dentigerous cyst (Fig.
28-15) or as a residual, radicular, globulomaxillary, or
lateral periodontal cyst, depending on its location. Radiopacities of varying size and density are often present.
Because these are space-occupying lesions, divergence of
roots and displacement of teeth may be noted.
Histologically, AOT is composed of neoplastic odontogenic epithelium with a distinct histologic appearance:
an encapsulated proliferation of swirling strands of spindle-shaped or polygonal epithelial cells within which are
nodules of duct-like or rosette-like structures composed
of a row of definite cuboidal to columnar epithelial cells;
these may be empty or may contain variable amounts of
an amorphous eosinophilic material, which may become
calcified in some areas.

ADENOMATOID ODONTOGENIC TUMOR
Adenomatoid odontogenic tumor (AOT) is a benign,
probably hamartomatous, epithelial tumor that occurs in
two intraosseous forms (follicular and extrafollicular) as
well as a peripheral variant. It has also been known as
adenoameloblastoma, which is misleading because it behaves clinically in a distinctly different fashion than does
ameloblastoma.
Several large clinical and epidemiologic reviews of AOT
have been reported.73-75 AOT can be subclassified into
three variants based on clinical and radiologic findings.
Two of these are central or intraosseous variants. The first
is the follicular (dentigerous) type, in which the tumor
is found in association with the crown of an impacted
tooth, with the most likely provisional diagnosis being
that of a dentigerous cyst. The second and less commonly
reported intraosseous variant is the extrafollicular type,
in which there is no association with the crown of an
impacted tooth and with the most likely provisional diagnosis being that of a residual, radicular, globulomaxillary,
or lateral periodontal cyst, depending upon its location.
The third variant is the peripheral or extraosseous variant, which may appear clinically as a fibroma. Approximately 98% of AOTs are reported as being the intrabony
or central type, with the follicular variant accounting
for 71%. Although most often asymptomatic, the tumor

Figure 28-15 Adenomatoid odontogenic tumor in a

12-year-old girl presenting as an expansile radiolucent lesion in the right maxilla associated with the lateral incisor.
The lesion was curetted, and the lateral incisor was allowed
to erupt and was orthodontically moved into proper alignment. (Courtesy Dr. Dan J. Crocker.)

Chapter 28

n

Because these lesions are, in almost all cases, well-­
encapsulated and show an identical benign biologic behavior, conservative surgical enucleation and curettage is the
treatment of choice. There is no propensity for recurrence.

ODONTOGENIC MYXOMA
Odontogenic myxoma is an uncommon benign mesodermal neoplasm of the jaws, thought to arise from
odontogenic ectomesenchyme or undifferentiated mesenchymal cells in the periodontal ligament. In one large
review,80 two thirds of the cases involved the mandible
and one third involved the maxilla, with the molar and
premolar region being the most common site of occurrence. Although the majority of cases were diagnosed
in the second to fourth decades of life, 33% of the cases
were in patients 20 years of age or younger (7% in patients younger than 10 years and 26% in the second decade of life).
Clinically, odontogenic myxomas are usually painless,
slow-growing lesions that can attain considerable size
before manifesting noticeable signs and symptoms such
as swelling or mobility and divergence of teeth. Several
cases have been reported as occurring in association with
impacted or missing teeth, while some cases have been
noted to occur in non–tooth-bearing areas, such as the
ramus and condyle.
Radiographically, odontogenic myxomas may be unilocular or multilocular lesions that may cause expansion,
thinning, and destruction of the cortical plates of bone
and displacement of teeth. Multilocular lesions often exhibit a mottled, soap-bubble, or honeycomb appearance.
There is no universal agreement regarding the relative frequency of presentation as a unilocular versus a multilocular radiographic appearance. In an analysis of 10 cases of
odontogenic myxoma in childhood, the most frequent
radiographic finding was a unilocular lesion with cortical
expansion and tooth displacement.81 In a review of cases
from all age groups, a multilocular appearance was noted
in 55% of cases, with a significant correlation between
the size of the lesion and its locularity being noted.80
Perhaps the frequency of unilocular lesions in pediatric
cases can be accounted for based on a smaller lesional size
in childhood cases, with larger lesions more likely being
multilocular.80,81 Because of the variable nature of the
radiographic appearance of odontogenic myxomas, the
differential diagnosis should include odontogenic lesions
such as dentigerous cyst, odontogenic keratocyst, and
ameloblastoma, as well as nonodontogenic lesions such
as CGCG, central hemangioma, traumatic bone cyst, and
aneurysmal bone cyst.
Histologically, odontogenic myxoma is made up of
stellate to spindle-shaped cells with delicate fibrillar interlacing processes, which produce a loose myxoid appearance. Occasional nests of inactive odontogenic epithelium may be noted, interspersed within this fibromyxoid
stroma.
A potentially major diagnostic pitfall lies in the fact
that the dental papilla from a developing tooth appears
nearly identical histologically to the stroma of an odontogenic myxoma, and the two can be confused, causing
misdiagnosis. One distinguishing characteristic is the

Tumors of the Oral Soft Tissues and Cysts and Tumors of Bone

617

presence of the peripheral layer of odontoblasts in the
dental papilla, if visible in the tissue sections available on
the slide.
The appropriate treatment for odontogenic myxoma
is still a matter of debate and is certainly dependent on
its size and location. The preferred treatment is complete
surgical excision, which may prove difficult because of infiltration and expansion of the tumor into bone and the
absence of a true capsule. Treatment is complicated by the
understandable reluctance to perform wide surgical excision of a benign lesion, especially in a child. Periodic follow-up to check for recurrence is important. In the series
of 10 cases of childhood odontogenic myxoma previously
discussed, two patients experienced recurrence within the
first year after surgery.81

AMELOBLASTIC FIBROMA
Ameloblastic fibroma is a true mixed neoplasm of odontogenic origin characterized by the proliferation of both
odontogenic epithelium and mesenchymal tissue without
the formation of enamel or dentin. It is generally believed
to be less aggressive than ameloblastoma. In a review of
the largest series of cases to date, the average age of occurrence was shown to be 15.9 years, with a male-to-female
ratio of 1.26:1.82
The lesion occurs in the mandible in approximately
75% of cases, with a predilection for the mandibular
second primary molar or second premolar-first molar
region.82,83 Its initial clinical presentation is most often
swelling; however, it is not uncommonly asymptomatic,
being found on routine radiographic examination. Radiographically, it may be a unilocular or multilocular radiolucent lesion, usually with well-defined, often sclerotic
borders, and may be found in association with unerupted
or displaced teeth.
Ameloblastic fibroma has a characteristic histologic appearance, with strands of cuboidal to columnar epithelial
cells and islands with peripheral columnar epithelial cells
surrounding loosely arranged epithelial cells resembling
stellate reticulum, which proliferate along with a primitive-appearing mesenchymal component that resembles
the developing dental papilla.
There is a rare peripheral ameloblastic fibroma.79 Also,
malignant transformation of ameloblastic fibroma into
ameloblastic fibrosarcoma has been reported and reviewed.82
Treatment is by surgical removal that is complete but
conservative compared with that advocated for ameloblastoma. At one time, simple surgical excision was advocated because there was believed to be little chance for
recurrence. Recent evidence, however, indicates that the
recurrence rate is higher than originally suspected. In a
recent review of published studies with well-documented
follow-up data, an overall recurrence rate of 33.3% was
noted.82 Hence, somewhat more aggressive surgical therapy with long-term clinical follow-up is indicated than was
previously recommended.

AMELOBLASTIC FIBRO-ODONTOMA
Ameloblastic fibro-odontoma (AFO) has been defined
as “a lesion similar to ameloblastic fibroma, but also

618

Chapter 28

n

Tumors of the Oral Soft Tissues and Cysts and Tumors of Bone

showing inductive changes that lead to the formation
of both dentin and enamel.”84 It should be stressed,
however, that they are separate tumors and that ameloblastic fibromas do not develop into AFOs or that the
latter will arise in the former.83 The average age of occurrence has been reported as 9.4 years, with the majority
of cases occurring in the mandible (59.5%).85 Although
typically described as a painless, slow-growing, and expanding lesion, it can show rapid growth.85 It most often presents radiographically as a well-circumscribed,
unilocular, mixed-density, radiolucent-radiopaque lesion associated with displaced or unerupted teeth, the
clinical manifestations of which commonly lead to its
diagnosis.84,85 Size may vary from lesions evident only
microscopically to a large mass of up to 6 cm or more in
its greatest dimension.
Histologically, the epithelial and mesenchymal components are those of an ameloblastic fibroma, with the
formation of osteodentin or dentin-like material and
enamel matrix.
While it is generally agreed that AFO is a hamartomatous lesion that is a stage preceding the development of
a complex odontoma,84,86 it has been argued that, from
a purely clinical standpoint, AFO should be classified as
a neoplasm. This is because of, among other reasons,
its potential for continued and even rapid growth with
potential for local destruction, as well as the fact that
malignant transformation of an AFO to an ameloblastic fibro-odontosarcoma has been reported.85 While the
overall biologic behavior of AFOs has been shown over
time to be fairly innocuous, the largest review to date has
shown a recurrence rate of 7.4%, with these recurrences
attributed to inadequate surgical removal at the time of
the initial treatment.85 Hence, conservative surgical removal with extraction of associated teeth has been recommended.

ODONTOMA
Odontomas are mixed odontogenic tumors in which
both the epithelial and mesenchymal components have
undergone functional differentiation to the point that
both enamel and dentin are formed. The most common
of the odontogenic tumors, odontomas are believed to be
hamartomatous rather than neoplastic. WHO has classified odontomas into two types depending on their degree of morphodifferentiation. The compound odontoma is
a lesion in which all the dental tissues are represented
in an orderly fashion so that there is at least superficial
anatomic resemblance to teeth. In a complex odontoma,
on the other hand, although all the dental tissues are represented, they are formed in such a rudimentary fashion
that there is little or no morphologic similarity to normal
tooth formation (Fig. 28-16).
A review of 149 cases indicated that compound
odontomas have a propensity for occurrence in the
canine and incisor region, being found more often in
the maxilla than in the mandible, whereas complex
odontomas show a predilection for occurrence in the
posterior jaws.88 Compound odontomas have been
reported as having a mean age of occurrence of 14.8
years compared with 20.3 years for complex odonto-

Figure 28-16 Complex composite odontoma delaying erup-

tion of the lateral incisor.

mas, possibly because the odontogenic tissue in the
anterior jaws, where the compound odontoma predominantly occurs, has finished its differentiation
earlier than tissues in the posterior part of the jaw.86
It has been argued that, because the radiographic and
histologic distinction between the compound and complex odontomas is poorly defined and because no appreciable clinical difference separates them, differentiation
between these two types cannot be justified given the
obliquity of the diagnostic criteria.89 Others take exception to this concept, holding the view that complex and
compound odontomas are pathogenetically different.84
Those who take exception argue that complex odontomas are the terminal stage in the series of hamartomatous lesions (termed the developing complex odontoma
line), including ameloblastic fibro-dentinoma, AFO,
and the hamartomatous type of ameloblastic fibroma.
They also argue that ameloblastic fibromas occurring
after the age of 20 years represent a benign neoplasm,
whereas those occurring during childhood (i.e., during
the tooth-development period) are likely to be nonneoplastic hamartomatous lesions. They believe that
compound odontoma represents a malformation with a
high degree of histomorphologic differentiation similar
to the process producing supernumerary teeth, “multiple schizodontia,” or locally conditioned hyperactivity
of the dental lamina.
Although odontomas are usually asymptomatic, they
may be the cause of noneruption or impaction of teeth
and retained primary teeth (see Fig. 28-15). In one study,
for instance, odontomas were found to be in association
with an unerupted tooth in 48% of cases and in conjunction with a dentigerous cyst in 28% of cases.89
Odontomas are most commonly found on routine radiographic examination, presenting as an irregular radi-

Chapter 28

n

opaque mass or as small, tooth-like structures with the
most frequent presenting symptom being lack of eruption of a permanent tooth or bony expansion or swelling.
The recommended treatment for an odontoma is conservative surgical excision, with care taken to remove the
surrounding soft tissue. No propensity for recurrence has
been noted.
Finally, the occurrence of the, albeit rare, ameloblastic
odontoma (odontoameloblastoma) should be mentioned.
These are reported to occur in an age range similar to that
of standard odontomas, with the location, clinically aggressive growth, and recurrence rate seen for conventional ameloblastomas.89

MALIGNANT TUMORS
FIBROBLASTIC TUMORS AND FIBROSARCOMA
IN INFANCY AND CHILDHOOD
Desmoid-type Fibromatosis
Desmoid-type fibromatosis (DF), also known as aggressive
fibromatosis or desmoid tumors, are fibroblastic-myofibroblastic tumors of intermediate prognosis that are locally
aggressive in behavior with a tendency for recurrence; and
although they do not metastasize, they can kill by local infiltration and extension into vital structures. The head and
neck region has been reported as a common site of involvement for these lesions, with DFs occurring there known as
fibromatosis, extra-abdominal fibromatoses, or extra-abdominal desmoid tumors. They most commonly present as
a painless mass involving the cheek, tongue, or submandibular region, with erosion of bone being a frequent finding
in lesions arising in soft-tissue adjacent to the jaws.91 In one
large study of DF occurring in the oral and paraoral region,
74% of cases occurred in the first decade of life.91
Histologically, DF is characterized by a proliferation of
spindle-shaped or oval bland and uniform cells that are
arranged in streaming fascicles with varying amounts of
collagen. Cellular pleomorphism and nuclear hyperchromatism are not noted, and mitoses are essentially absent.
Immunostaining confirms their fibroblastic-myofibroblastic nature.
When DFs occur in bone, they are still termed desmoplastic fibromas or aggressive fibromatosis, with the
mandible being the most common site of involvement.92
Microscopically, there is nothing to differentiate desmoplastic fibroma of bone from DF occurring in the soft tissues. The radiographic findings are variable, ranging from
unilocular to multilocular with borders that may vary
from ill-defined to well-demarcated. Whereas magnetic
resonance imaging may be valuable in surgical planning,
computed tomography is best for demonstrating perforation of the cortical plate.92 Because of the locally aggressive nature of DF, complete surgical excision with a
generous margin of normal tissue has been reported as
the treatment of choice, with recurrence being dependent
on the adequacy of initial treatment.
Relative to treatment of DF occurring in the soft tissues, aggressive surgery has traditionally been the mainstay of therapy, with procedures producing significant
loss of function and morbidity without being curative in

Tumors of the Oral Soft Tissues and Cysts and Tumors of Bone

619

many cases.93 This is reported to have led to more recent
strategies that have included various systemic therapies
and even a “wait and see” strategy following clinical and
radiological assessment.93

Fibrosarcoma
Fibrosarcoma is a malignant neoplasm of fibroblastic and
myofibroblastic differentiation. Congenital and infantile
fibrosarcoma (IFS) is a relatively rare tumor that usually
is manifest in the first year of life, especially in the first 3
months, and almost always before 4 years of age.94 Compared with DF, it is generally more cellular in appearance,
with increased mitotic activity, and radiographically, it
may be more destructively expansile.94 IFS, as with DF, is
classified among soft part tumors of intermediate prognosis.93 It rarely metastasizes and has a very good prognosis.
While surgery has been the traditional mainstay of treatment for IFS, currently, after initial biopsy, neoadjuvant
chemotherapy is used, after which delayed conservative
resection may be performed. If complete remission is
noted following chemotherapy, then the patient may be
spared surgery.95 Due to the young age of the patients,
radiation is not an option.93

RHABDOMYOSARCOMA
Rhabdomyosarcoma (RMS) is a malignant neoplasm
derived from primitive mesenchymal tissue destined to
form striated skeletal muscle.96,97 It is the most common soft-tissue sarcoma in children, accounting for
more than half of all such lesions occurring in childhood. It is one of the small, round, blue-cell tumors of
childhood, which include neoplasms such as neuroblastoma, Ewing’s sarcoma, and lymphoma.97 There are two
key age ranges for the occurrence of RMS in children—
from 2 to 6 years of age and in adolescence—with the
early peak due primarily to occurrences in the head and
neck region and genitourinary tract and the peak during adolescence due to tumors of the testes and adjacent structures.98
Three general histologic subtypes of RMS are recognized: embryonal and its botryoid variant, alveolar,
and pleomorphic. The embryonal subtype accounts for
most cases of RMS in infancy and childhood.97 The most
common clinical finding is a mass occurring in any region of the head and neck where striated muscle or its
mesenchymal progenitor cells exist. There are three primary sites of involvement for RMS in the head and neck
in children: the eyelid and orbit, parameningeal sites,
and remaining head and neck sites, including the oral
cavity.87 The parameningeal sites include the pterygopalatine and infratemporal fossas, nasal cavity, nasopharynx, paranasal sinuses, and middle ear and mastoid. Although there is not good consensus about site
predilection within the oral cavity, the soft palate and
tonsillar region, tongue, and cheek seem to be most frequently involved, with the gingiva and floor of mouth
being unusual locations.100,101 Typically, a rapidly growing, often nonulcerated soft-­tissue mass, RMS typically
metastasizes by hematogenous routes to lungs, bone,
and brain but may also disseminate via the lymphatics
or direct extension.

620

Chapter 28

n

Tumors of the Oral Soft Tissues and Cysts and Tumors of Bone

RMS arising in the head and neck region are characterized by a wide variation in survival rate, which is dependent on the site, with orbital lesions having the highest
survival rates of any site in the body and parameningeal
tumors having a worse prognosis.102 The high survival
rate in patients with orbital lesions is likely because they
present with less advanced disease compared with the insidious presentation of parameningeal primaries, which
more typically present with advanced-stage disease.102
Even though age, anatomic subsite, and resectability were
not shown to correlate with survival, the extent of disease, including tumor size, invasiveness, nodal metastases, and distant disease at presentation, was significantly
associated with mortality.102 Children 11 years of age or
younger with a tumor 5 cm or smaller have been shown
to have the best survival, whereas patients older than
11 years with a tumor larger than 5 cm had the worst
survival outcome.103 Treatment considerations include
risk-guided therapy based on the chance of a cure with
a specific treatment approach and taking into consideration both near- and long-term side effects of the various
therapeutic modalities. In general, then, all patients will
likely receive chemotherapy along with a local treatment
strategy such as surgery, radiation therapy, or both.97

OSTEOGENIC SARCOMA
Osteogenic sarcoma (OS) is an uncommon, highly malignant, primary neoplasm of bone with a soft-tissue counterpart with a similar histomorphology. Its peak age of
occurrence is the second decade of life, with the modal
age of incidence being 16 years for girls and 18 for boys.104
The most common site of involvement is the distal femur,
followed by the proximal tibia and proximal humerus.
OS of the jaws (OSJ) accounts for approximately 6.5%
of all cases of OS, with the average age of onset being 10
to 20 years later than for skeletal lesions.105 The mandible
seems to be involved more often than the maxilla.105,106
Swelling with or without pain is the most frequently described early symptom, although paresthesia/anesthesia
and loosening of the teeth may be noted. In a clinicopathologic study of 22 cases of OS of the head and neck in
a pediatric population ranging from 1 to 18 years (mean
age, 12.2 years), the primary symptoms were painless
swelling occasionally associated with pain or tenderness.
In a few cases there was associated malocclusion and loosening or loss of teeth.107 The average duration of symptoms was 5.9 months. Nineteen cases (86%) occurred in
the mandible, two cases in the sphenoid sinus, and one
in the maxilla.
The radiographic findings are typically those of a poorly
defined, bone-destructive lesion suggestive of malignancy. Radiographically, it may be osteoblastic or osteolytic
or may have a mixed radiographic appearance. One study
reported that most of the lesions on the maxilla were osteoblastic, whereas most of those on the mandible were
osteolytic.108 A frequently described radiographic feature
is a “sun-ray” appearance, with delicate, hair-like osteophytes radiating in a sunburst fashion away from the
peripheral surface of the lesion. This has been reported
to occur in as few as 10% and as many as 55% of cases.105,109 An additional radiographic finding in early OSJ

is symmetric widening of the periodontal ligament space
around one or more of the teeth in the area of the lesion.
Histologically, OS is characterized by the production
of tumor osteoid forming a malignant stroma that often
appears fibroblastic. These tumors are typically classified
histologically into osteoblastic, chondroblastic, or fibroblastic subtypes according to the dominant histologic
pattern. There is no agreement, however, as to whether
the histologic subtype has any significant bearing on the
patient’s prognosis.
The primary treatment modality for OSJ should always
be radical surgery, with the single most important factor in
curative therapy being its amenability to radical resection
with clear margins.105 Overall, chemotherapy has not been
shown to be as effective in OSJ as in extragnathic sites for
two reasons: first, even though almost all patients with OS of
the long bones have at least microscopic metastatic disease
at the time of diagnosis, the incidence of metastatic disease
at the time of diagnosis for OSJ in all age groups is reported
to be no higher than 18%98; and second, OSJs tend to be
better differentiated than those involving the long bones,
which may be partially responsible for the better prognosis
for patients with osteosarcoma of the jaws.108,110 Even so,
it is still recommended that patients with primary osteosarcoma of the jaws should be treated with multi-agent chemotherapy in addition to complete surgical excision, with
free surgical margins being absolutely essential.111

EWING’S SARCOMA
After osteosarcoma, the Ewing’s sarcoma (ES) family of
tumors (ES along with peripheral primitive neuroectodermal tumor [pPNET]) is the second most common
primary malignancy of bone in children and adolescents. Ewing’s sarcoma of bone and soft tissue, as well
as pPNET, are small round-cell tumors, the genetic hallmarks of which are a translocation of chromosomes 11
and 22, t(11;22)(q24;q12),112-114 and, in most cases, overexpression of the MIC2 gene surface marker,100 which
differentiates them from the majority of other small
round-cell tumors.
The histologic and electron microscopic features of ES
and pPNET, as well as expression of the antigen of the
MIC2 gene, provide the basis for characterizing them as
neuroectodermally derived neoplasms.115,116
Approximately 4% of primary cases of ES arising in
bone arise in the bones of the head and neck, with the
skull being the most frequent site of involvement and the
mandible being the most commonly involved gnathic
bone.117 A review of 105 cases showed the average age at
diagnosis to be 15.9 years, with an age range of 2 to 44
years at presentation.118 There was a slight predilection for
occurrence in males, with a male-to-female ratio of 1.5:1.
The mandible was involved more than twice as often as
the maxilla, with a predilection of 4:1 for occurrence in
the posterior aspect of the jaws over other regions.
A histopathologically identical extraskeletal form of
ES has been identified.119 In a series of 130 patients with
ES of soft tissue in childhood, 18% of cases involved the
head and neck. Patients with soft-tissue or extraskeletal ES
were compared with patients with pPNET.120 There were
no significant differences in patient age, gender, tumor

Chapter 28

n

location, or stage at presentation between patients with
ES and those with pPNET of the soft tissue.
Localized swelling and pain are the most frequent complaints at the time of presentation, although paresthesia
and tooth mobility may also be presenting symptoms.
The soft tissue overlying the lesion may be erythematous
and warm to the touch, and thus more suggestive of an
inflammatory process than a neoplasm (Fig. 28-17). In addition, the patient may have fever, elevated erythrocyte
sedimentation rate, increased serum lactic dehydrogenase
level, anemia, and leukocytosis.
The radiographic features are those of a diffuse bonedestructive lesion, appearing as an irregular, somewhat
mottled, radiolucent lesion that may resemble an osteomyelitis (Fig. 28-18). Although reduplication or lamination of the periosteum has been considered a common radiologic sign of ES of long bones, this has been shown not
to be a common feature of this disease in the jaw bones;
however, sun-ray spicules of periosteal bone may be seen
as previously described for osteogenic sarcoma.118 Computed tomography and, in particular, magnetic resonance
imaging are invaluable in further delineating the extent
of disease not readily visible on plain radiographs.121,122
Histologically, ES appears as sheets of cells with small,
dark-staining nuclei and poorly defined cytoplasmic outlines. Mitotic figures are prominent, and necrosis is a common feature. Sheets of cells may be separated by vascular
connective tissue septa. The presence of intracytoplasmic
glycogen and positive results on periodic acid–Schiff staining are essential findings unless there is documented glycogen content on electron microscopy. Detection of MIC2
antigen along with the use of molecular techniques to detect the t(11;22) (q24;q12) translocation have generally
improved the clinician’s ability to diagnose these tumors.
In the past, ES as a whole has been associated with an
almost uniformly poor prognosis, with nearly all patients
having micrometastatic disease at the time of diagnosis. The prognosis for ES in the head and neck, however,
has been noted to be significantly better than that for ES
overall.117 In a report by the Intergroup Ewing’s Sarcoma
Study of patients who had been followed in the study
for more than 3 years, 80% were alive and well without
known progressive, recurrent or metastatic disease. Of the
10 patients who had survived 5 years or longer, none had
subsequently died; and of the 5 who had died, none had
gnathic involvement.
Chemotherapy is the cornerstone of treatment for ES
and is usually applied in a neoadjuvant fashion.122 Therapy consists of systemic multiagent chemotherapy along
with local control, which may consist of surgery, radiation therapy, or a combination of the two, depending on
the age of the patient, location of the primary tumor, and
functional consequences of therapy. When surgery is employed, the goal should be complete tumor removal, avoiding marginal resection.122 Because of the potential for postradiation sarcomas, particularly bone sarcoma in the field
of radiation treatment, the importance of local control of
the disease with surgery and safe local control with radiation is now emphasized. Patients with clinically detectable
metastases at the time of diagnosis and those with relapse
after initial therapy have a significantly poorer prognosis.

Tumors of the Oral Soft Tissues and Cysts and Tumors of Bone

621

Figure 28-17 Photograph of a 6-year-old boy with Ewing’s

sarcoma who had a 1-month history of swelling on the left
side of his face. Clinically, there was swelling with mucosal
ulceration in the mucobuccal fold in the first molar area.
(Courtesy Drs. Richard L. Miller and William Epstein.)

Figure 28-18 Radiograph of the same patient as in Figure

28-16 with Ewing’s sarcoma involving the left angle of the
mandible. Notice the mottled radiolucent appearance.
(Courtesy Drs. Richard L. Miller and William Epstein.)

LANGERHANS CELL HISTIOCYTOSIS
(HISTIOCYTOSIS X)
Langerhans cell histiocytosis (LCH) is the current designation replacing the term histiocytosis X that was introduced by Lichtenstein in 1953 as a unifying designation
for several previous eponyms, including Letterer-Siwe dis-

622

Chapter 28

n

Tumors of the Oral Soft Tissues and Cysts and Tumors of Bone

ease, Hand-Schüller-Christian disease, and eosinophilic
granuloma (LCH of bone).123 Prior to this, the three clinical entities that comprise this nosologic category were described and categorized over a period of nearly 50 years.124
Histiocytosis X was renamed LCH in 1987.125 While its
etiology and pathogenesis remain obscure, the one common denominator is the Langerhans cell, a bone marrow–
derived, antigen-presenting dendritic cell. Langerhans
cells reside in the skin, thymus, and mucosal epithelium,
including the oropharynx and nasopharynx, esophagus,
bronchi, and cervix, and are said to be the most potent
antigen-presenting cells in the body.126
Histologically, LCH is characterized by the presence
of uniform sheets of large round Langerhans histiocytes,
which have been shown to be immature dendritic cells
and not histiocytes at all, with a homogenous pink cytoplasm when stained with hematoxylin and eosin. These
Langerhans cell histiocytes are interspersed with variable
numbers of eosinophils, lymphocytes, plasma cells, and
multinucleated giant cells, particularly in lesions of bone.
Langerhans cells are characterized ultrastructurally by the
presence of Langerhans or Birbeck granules, rod-shaped
organelles that may have a vesicular portion imparting
the so-called “tennis racquet appearance” under the electron microscope. LCH can now be identified on the basis
of immunoreactivity to cell-surface markers such as CD-ia
and, more specifically, CD-207 (Langerin), which differentiates it from other dendritic disorders.127,128
The clinical manifestations of LCH are variable and,
as previously noted, were historically divided into distinct entities. The term Letterer-Siwe disease (now better
termed acute disseminated histiocytosis) has been used as a
moniker for an acute fulminating proliferative disorder
involving Langerhans histiocytes that chiefly affects infants and children younger than 3 years of age. It is often characterized initially by the development of a scaly
erythematous skin rash initially most prominent on the
trunk but progressing to involve the scalp and extremities (Fig. 28-19). This is accompanied by a persistent lowgrade fever, anemia, thrombocytopenia, hepatosplenomegaly, and lymphadenopathy.
Bony involvement, indistinguishable from that found
in chronic disseminated histiocytosis (Hand-SchüllerChristian disease) and eosinophilic granuloma of bone,
may be noted (Fig. 28-20). Oral lesions with swelling,
pain, ulceration, gingival inflammation and necrosis, and
destruction of alveolar bone with premature exfoliation of
the teeth may be an early manifestation of this form of the
disease. Although multiagent chemotherapy may result in
regression of the disease in some cases, patients with this
form of the disease have a relatively poor prognosis.
Hand-Schüller-Christian disease (now better termed
chronic disseminated histiocytosis) has been used to describe
the chronic disseminated form of LCH, which is characterized by the development of multifocal eosinophilic granulomas of bone, lymphadenopathy, and visceral involvement,
especially hepatosplenomegaly (Fig. 28-21). The classic
clinical triad that has often been described for this disease is the occurrence of punched-out–appearing radiolucent defects in membranous bones, exophthalmos, and
diabetes insipidus. Chronic otitis media is also a frequent

Figure 28-19 Characteristic erythematous scaly skin rash in

a 5½-month-old infant with Letterer-Siwe disease.

Figure 28-20 Diffuse destruction of maxillary and mandibu-

lar alveolar bone around the developing primary teeth in
the same patient as in Figure 28-18. Notice also destruction
of the left angle and ramus of the mandible.

finding. Although usually diagnosed early in the first decade of life, chronic disseminated histiocytosis has been
reported to occur as late as the sixth decade.129 The treatment varies according to the extent of the disease, with
surgical curettage or radiation therapy being used to treat
focal disease. Multiagent chemotherapy has been relatively successful in long-term control of disseminated disease.
Eosinophilic granuloma (LCH of bone) is the most
common and also least severe form of LCH. It is characterized by single or multiple usually well-defined radiolucent bony lesions, most often accompanied by pain

Chapter 28

n

Figure 28-21 Radiograph of a 12-month-old girl with Hand-

Schüller-Christian disease. There is an expansile, radiolucent
lesion in the right body of the mandible as well as destruction of the greater wing of the sphenoid and supraorbital
rim on the left.

and swelling. Older children and young adults most
commonly display this form of the disease. In addition
to the mandible and skull, the femur, humerus, ribs,
and pelvis are also frequently involved. The maxilla is
involved less frequently than the mandible, with the
midposterior mandible being the most common site of
occurrence. Skin and visceral involvement such as that
described for the acute and chronic disseminated forms
of the disease are absent. Several options exist for patients with eosinophilic granuloma. After confirmation
of the diagnosis by biopsy, the lesion may be left alone
for observation, it may be surgically curetted or excised,
intralesional injections of corticosteroids may be given,
or low-dose radiotherapy may be used. In one series of
41 lesions in 25 patients, treatment varied from excisional biopsy to curettage and peripheral ostectomy as
the only surgical treatment, followed by low-dose radiotherapy. Three lesions (7.3%) in three patients (12%)
recurred.130

REFERENCES
1.	Abbey LM, Page DG, Sawyer DR: The clinical and histopathologic features of a series of 464 oral squamous cell papillomas, Oral Surg 49:419–428, 1980.
2.	Greer RO, Goldman HM: Oral papillomas: clinicopathologic evaluation and retrospective examination for dyskeratosis in 110 lesions, Oral Surg 38:435–440, 1974.
3.	Praetorius F: HPV-associated diseases of oral mucosa, Clin
Dermatol 15:399–413, 1997.
4.	Syrjänen S: Human papillomavirus infections and oral tumors, Med Microbiol Immunol 192(3):123–128, 2003.

Tumors of the Oral Soft Tissues and Cysts and Tumors of Bone

623

5.	Syrjänen S: Current concepts on human papillomavirus infections in children, APMIS 118:494–509, 2010.
6.	Rautava J, Syrjänen S: Human papillomavirus infections in
the oral mucosa, J Am Dent Assoc 142(8):905–914, 2011.
7.	Castro TP, Filbo IB: Prevalence of human papillomavirus
(HPV) in oral cavity and oropharynx, Braz J Otorhinolaryngol
723(2):272–282, 2006.
8.	Ward KA et al.: Detection of human papilloma virus DNA
sequences in oral squamous cell papillomas by the polymerase chain reaction, Oral Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol Oral
Radiol Endod 80:63–66, 1995.
9.	Eversole LR, Laipis PJ: Oral squamous papillomas: detection
of HPV DNA by in situ hybridization, Oral Surg Oral Med
Oral Pathol 65:545–550, 1988.
10.	Angelopoulos AP: Pyogenic granuloma of the oral cavity: statistical analysis of its clinical features, J Oral Surg 29:840–847,
1971.
11.	Lawoyin JO, Arotiba JT, Dosumu OO: Oral pyogenic granuloma: a review of 38 cases from Ibadan, Nigeria, Br J Oral
Maxillofac Surg 35:185–189, 1997.
12.	Cundiff EJ: Peripheral ossifying fibroma: a review of 365
cases, master’s thesis, Bloomington, IN, 1972, Indiana University. Cited in Shafer WG, Hine MK, Levy BM: Textbook of
oral pathology, ed 4, Philadelphia, 1983, WB Saunders.
13.	Eversole LR, Rovin S: Reactive lesions of the gingiva, J Oral
Pathol 1:30–38, 1972.
14.	Cuisia ZE, Brannon RB: Peripheral ossifying fibroma—a clinical
evaluation of 134 pediatric cases, Pediatr Dent 23(3):245–248,
2001.
15.	Gardner DG: The peripheral odontogenic fibroma: an attempt at clarification, Oral Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol 54:40–48,
1982.
16.	Daley TD, Wysocki GP: Peripheral odontogenic fibroma,
Oral Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol 78(3):329–336, 1994.
17.	Giansanti JS, Waldron CA: Peripheral giant cell granuloma:
review of 720 cases, J Oral Surg 27:787–791, 1969.
18.	Andersen L, Fejerskov O, Philipsen HP: Oral giant cell granulomas: a clinical and histological study of 129 new cases,
Acta Pathol Microbiol Scand 5(Sec 81):606–616, 1973.
19.	Nedir R, Lombardi T, Samson J: Recurrent peripheral giant cell
granuloma associated with cervical resorption, J Periodontol
68:381–384, 1997.
20.	McClatchey AI: Neurofibromatosis, Annu Rev Pathol 2:
191–216, 2007.
21.	Hersh JH: American Academy of Pediatrics Committee on
Genetics: Health supervision for children with neurofibromatosis, Pediatrics 121(3):633–642, 2008.
22.	Lee L, Yan YH, Pharoah MJ: Radiographic features of the
mandible in neurofibromatosis: a report of 10 cases and review of the literature, Oral Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol Oral
Radiol Endod 81:361–367, 1996.
23.	Needle MN et al.: Prognostic signs in the surgical management
of plexiform neurofibroma: The Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia experience, 1974-1994, J Pediatr 131:678–682, 1997.
24.	Robertson RL et al.: Head and neck vascular anomalies of
childhood, Neuroimaging Clin North Am 9(1):115–132, 1999.
25.	Mulliken JB, Glowacki J: Hemangiomas and vascular malformation in infants and children: a classification based on endothelial characteristics, Plast Reconstr Surg 69(3):412–422,
1982.
26.	Arneja JS, Gosain AK: Vascular malformations, Plast Reconstr Surg 122(6):1982–1984, 2008.
27.	Lamberg MA, Tasanen A, Jääskeläinen J: Fatality from central hemangioma of the mandible, J Oral Surg 37(8):578–584,
1979.
28.	Hancock BJ et al.: Complications of lymphangiomas in
children, J Pediatr Surg 27(2):220–226, 1992.

624

Chapter 28

n

Tumors of the Oral Soft Tissues and Cysts and Tumors of Bone

29.	Ugras W et al.: Immunohistochemical study on histogenesis of congenital epulis and review of the literature, Pathol
Int 47:627–632, 1997.
30.	Kaiserling E, Ruck P, Xiao JC: Congenital epulis and granular cell tumor: a histologic and immunohistochemical
study, Oral Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol Oral Radiol Endod
80(6):687–697, 1995.
31.	Ritwik P, Brannon RB, Musselman R: Spontaneous regression of congenital epulis: a case report and review of the
literature, J Med Case Rep 4:331–334, 2010.
32.	Eversole R, Su L, El Mofty S: Benign fibro-osseous lesions of the
craniofacial complex. A review, Head Neck Pathol 2:177–202,
2008.
33.	Petrikowski CG et al.: Radiographic differentiation of osteogenic sarcoma, osteomyelitis, and fibrous dysplasia of
the jaws, Oral Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol Oral Radiol Endod
80:744–750, 1995.
34.	Mäkitie AA, Törnwall J, Mäkitie O: Bisphosphonate treatment in craniofacial fibrous dysplasia—a case report and review of the literature, Clin Rheumatol 27(6):809–812, 2008.
35.	Landesberg R et al.: Alternative indications for bisphosphonate therapy, J Oral Maxillofac Surg 67(Suppl 1):27–34, 2009.
36.	Eversole LR, Leider AS, Nelson K: Ossifying fibroma: a clinicopathologic study of sixty-four cases, Oral Surg Oral Med
Oral Pathol 60:505–511, 1985.
37.	Sciubba JJ, Younai F: Ossifying fibroma of the mandible and
maxilla: review of 18 cases, J Oral Pathol Med 18:315–321,
1989.
38.	Waldron CA: Fibro-osseous lesions of the jaws, J Oral Surg
28:58–64, 1970.
39.	El-Mofty S: Psammomatoid and trabecular juvenile ossifying fibroma of the craniofacial skeleton: two distinct clinicopathologic entities, Oral Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol Oral
Radiol Endod 93:296–304, 2002.
40.	Jaffe HL: Giant-cell reparative granuloma, traumatic bone
cyst, and fibrous (fibro-osseous) dysplasia of the jawbones,
Oral Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol 6(1):159–175, 1953.
41.	Kaffe I et al.: Radiologic features of central giant cell granuloma of the jaws, Oral Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol Oral Radiol
Endod 81:720–726, 1996.
42.	Waldron CA, Shafer WG: The central giant cell reparative
granuloma of the jaws: an analysis of 38 cases, Am J Clin
Pathol 45:437–447, 1966.
43.	Auclair PL et al.: A clinical and histomorphologic comparison of the central giant cell granuloma and the giant
cell tumor, Oral Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol 66:197–208,
1988.
44.	Whitaker SB, Waldron CA: Central giant cell lesions of the
jaw. A clinical, radiologic, and histopathologic study, Oral
Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol 75(2):199–208, 1993.
45.	Chuong R et al.: Central giant cell lesions of the jaw: a clinicopathologic study, Oral Maxillofac Surg 44(9):708–713, 1986.
46.	de Lange J, van den Akker HP, van den Berg H: Central giant cell granuloma of the jaw: a review of the literature with
emphasis on therapy options, Oral Med Oral Pathol Oral Radiol Endod 104(5):603–615, 2007.
47.	Suarez-Roa MDL et al.: Interventions for central giant cell
granuloma (CGCG) of the jaws, Cochrane Database Syst Rev
4:CD007404, 2009.
48.	Browne RM: The pathogenesis of odontogenic cysts: a review, J Oral Pathol 4(1):31–46, 1975.
49.	Brannon RB: The odontogenic keratocyst: a clinicopathologic study of 312 cases. Part I. Clinical features, Oral Surg
42:54–72, 1976.
50.	Mourshed F: A roentgenographic study of dentigerous
cysts. I. Incidence in a population sample, Oral Surg Oral
Med Oral Pathol 18:47–53, 1964.

51.	Benn A, Altini M: Dentigerous cysts of inflammatory origin.
A clinicopathologic study, Oral Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol
Oral Radiol Endod 81(2):203–209, 1996.
52.	Mourshed F: A roentgenographic study of dentigerous cysts.
II. Role of roentgenograms in detecting dentigerous cyst in
the early stages, Oral Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol 18:54–61, 1964.
53.	McMillan MD, Smillie AC: Ameloblastomas associated with
dentigerous cysts, Oral Surg 51:489–496, 1981.
54.	Leider AS, Eversole LR, Barkin ME: Cystic ameloblastoma,
Oral Surg 60:624–630, 1985.
55.	Gardner DG, Corio RL: Plexiform unicystic ameloblastoma:
a variant of ameloblastoma with a low recurrence rate after
enucleation, Cancer 53:1730–1735, 1984.
56.	Wright JM: The odontogenic keratocyst: orthokeratinized
variant, Oral Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol 51(6):609–618, 1981.
57.	Eyre J, Zakrzewska JM: The conservative management of
large odontogenic keratocysts, Br J Oral Maxillofac Surg
23:195–203, 1985.
58.	Woolgar JA, Rippin JW, Browne RM: A comparative study
of the clinical and histological features of recurrent and
non-recurrent odontogenic keratocysts, J Oral Pathol
16:124–128, 1987.
59.	Anand VK, Arrowood JP, Krolls SO: Malignant potential
of the odontogenic keratocyst, Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg
111:124–129, 1994.
60.	Forsell K, Forsell H, Kahnberg KE: Recurrence of keratocysts
in a long-term follow-up study, Int J Oral Surg 17:25–28, 1988.
61.	Blanas N et al.: Systematic review of the treatment and
prognosis of the odontogenic keratocyst, Oral Surg Oral Med
Oral Pathol Oral Radiol Endod 90:553–558, 2000.
62.	Kaczmarzyk T, Mojsa I, Stypulkowska J: A systematic review
of the recurrence rate for keratocystic odontogenic tumor
in relation to treatment modalities, Int J Oral Maxillofac Surg
41:756–767, 2012.
63.	Meara JG et al.: The odontogenic keratocyst: a 20-year
clinicopathologic review, Laryngoscope 108:280–283, 1998.
64.	Gorlin RJ: Nevoid basal cell carcinoma (Gorlin) syndrome,
Genet Med 6(6):530–539, 2004.
65.	Robinson L, Martinez MG: Unicystic ameloblastoma: a
prognostically distinct entity, Cancer 40:2278–2285, 1977.
66.	Philipsen HP, Reichert PA: Unicystic ameloblastoma. A review of 193 cases from the literature, Oral Oncol 34:317–325,
1998.
67.	Vickers RA, Gorlin RJ: Ameloblastoma: delineation of early
histopathologic features of neoplasia, Cancer 26:699–710,
1970.
68.	Ord RA et al.: Ameloblastoma in children, J Oral Maxillofac
Surg 60:762–770, 2002.
69.	Kahn MA: Ameloblastoma in young persons: a clinicopathologic analysis and etiologic investigation, Oral Surg Oral
Med Oral Pathol 67:706–715, 1989.
70.	Rosenstein T et al.: Cystic ameloblastoma—behavior and
treatment of 21 cases, J Oral Maxillofac Surg 59:1311–1318,
2001.
71.	Zhang J et al.: Ameloblastoma in children and adolescents,
Br J Oral Maxillofac Surg 48:549–554, 2010.
72.	Ghandhi D et al.: Ameloblastoma: a surgeon’s dilemma, J
Oral Maxillofac Surg 64(7):1010–1014, 2006.
73.	Philipsen HP, Reichart PA: Adenomatoid odontogenic tumor: facts and figures, Oral Oncol 35:125–131, 1998.
74.	Philipsen HP et al.: Adenomatoid odontogenic tumor: biologic profile based on 499 cases, J Oral Pathol Med 20:149–158,
1991.
75.	Philipsen HP et al.: An updated clinical and epidemiological
profile of the adenomatoid odontogenic tumour: a collaborative retrospective study, J Oral Pathol Med 36(7):383–393,
2007.

Chapter 28

n

76.	Abrams AM, Melrose RJ, Howell FV: Adenoameloblastoma; a
clinicopathologic study of ten new cases, Cancer 22:175–185,
1968.
77.	Courtney RM, Kerr DA: The odontogenic adenomatoid tumor. A comprehensive study of twenty new cases, Oral Surg
Oral Med Oral Pathol 39:424–435, 1975.
78.	Ide F et al.: Rare peripheral odontogenic tumors: report of 5
cases and comprehensive review of the literature, Oral Surg
Oral Med Oral Pathol Oral Radiol Endod 106(4):e22–e28, 2008.
79.	Ide F et al.: Development and growth of adenomatoid
odontogenic tumor related to formation and eruption of
teeth, Head and Neck Pathol 5:123–132, 2011.
80.	Kaffe I, Naor H, Buchner A: Clinical and radiological features of odontogenic myxoma of the jaws, Dentomaxillofac
Radiol 26:203–299, 1997.
81.	Keszler A, Dominguez FV, Giannunzio G: Myxoma in
childhood: an analysis of 10 cases, J Oral Maxillofac Surg
53:518–521, 1995.
82.	Chen Y, Wang JM, Li TJ: Ameloblastic fibroma: a review of
published studies with special reference to its nature and
biological behavior, Oral Oncol 43(10):960–969, 2007.
83.	Tomich CE: Benign mixed odontogenic tumors, Sem Diagnostic Pathol 16(4):308–316, 1999.
84.	Philipsen HP, Reichart PA, Praetorius F: Mixed odontogenic
tumours and odontomas: considerations on interrelationship. Review of the literature and presentation of 134 new
cases of odontomas, Oral Oncol 33:86–99, 1997.
85.	Boxberger NR, Brannon RB, Fowler CB: Ameloblastic fibroodontoma: A clinicopathologic study of 12 cases, J Clin Padiatr Dent 35(4):397–404, 2011.
86.	Slootweg PJ: An analysis of the interrelationship of the
mixed odontogenic tumors—ameloblastic fibroma, ameloblastic fibro-odontoma and the odontomas, Oral Surg
51:266–276, 1981.
87.	Takeda Y: Ameloblastic fibroma and related lesions: current
pathologic concept, Oral Oncol 35:535–540, 1999.
88.	Budnick SD: Complex and compound odontomas, Oral Surg
Oral Med Oral Pathol 42:501–506, 1976.
89.	Kaugars GE, Miller ME, Abbey LM: Odontomas, Oral Surg
Oral Med Oral Pathol 67:172–176, 1989.
90.	Kaugars GE: Ameloblastic odontoma (odonto-ameloblastoma), Oral Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol 71:371–373, 1991.
91.	Fowler CB, Hartman KS, Brannon RB: Fibromatosis of the
oral and paraoral region, Oral Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol
77(4):373–386, 1994.
92.	Said-Al-Naief N et al.: Desmoplastic fibroma of the jaw: a
case report and review of literature, Oral Surg Oral Med Oral
Pathol Oral Radiol Endod 101(1):82–94, 2006.
93.	Ferrari A et al.: Fibroblastic tumors of intermediate malignancy in childhood, Expert Rev Anticancer Ther 13(2):225–236,
2013.
94.	Fisher C: Fibromatosis and fibrosarcoma in infancy and
childhood, Eur J Cancer 32A:2094–2100, 1996.
95.	Orbach D et al.: Infantile fibrosarcoma: management based
on the European experience, J Clin Oncol 28(2):313–323,
2010.
96.	Hicks J, Flaitz C: Rhabdomyosarcoma of the head and neck
in children, Oral Oncol 38:450–459, 2007.
97.	Paulino AC, Okcu MF: Rhabdomyosarcoma, Curr Probl Cancer 32:7–34, 2008.
98.	Miller RW, Calager NA: Fatal rhabdomyosarcoma among
children in the United States, 1960-69, Cancer 34(6):
1897–1900, 1974.
99.	Sutow WW et al.: Three-year relapse-free survival rates in
childhood rhabdomyosarcoma of the head and neck: report
from the Intergroup Rhabdomyosarcoma Study, Cancer
49(11):2217–2221, 1982.

Tumors of the Oral Soft Tissues and Cysts and Tumors of Bone

625

100.	Bras J, Batsakis JC, Luna MA: Rhabdomyosarcoma of the oral
soft tissues, Oral Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol 64(5):585–596,
1987.
101.	Peters E et al.: Rhabdomyosarcoma of the oral and paraoral
region, Cancer 63(5):963–966, 1989.
102.	Kraus DH et al.: Pediatric rhabdomyosarcoma of the head
and neck, Am J Surg 174:556–560, 1997.
103.	Simon JH et al.: Prognostic factors in head and neck rhabdomyosarcoma, Head Neck 24:468–473, 2002.
104.	Meyers PA, Gorlick R: Osteosarcoma, Pediatr Clin North Am
44:973–989, 1997.
105.	Fernandes R et al.: Osteogenic sarcoma of the jaw: a 10-year
experience, J Oral Maxillofac Surg 65(7):1286–1291, 2007.
106.	Garrington GE et al.: Osteosarcoma of the jaws: analysis of
56 cases, Cancer 20:377–391, 1967.
107.	Gadwal SR et al.: Primary osteosarcoma of the head and
neck in pediatric patients: clinical pathologic study of 22
cases with a review of the literature, Cancer 91:598–605,
2001.
108.	Clark JL et al.: Osteosarcoma of the jaw, Cancer 51:
2311–2316, 1983.
109.	August M, Magennis P, Dewitt D: Osteogenic sarcoma of
the jaws: factors influencing prognosis, Int J Oral Maxillofac
Surg 26(3):198–204, 1997.
110.	Mardinger O et al.: Osteosarcoma of the jaw: The Chaim
Shebe Medical Center experience, Oral Surg Oral Med Oral
Pathol Oral Radiol Endod 91:445–451, 2001.
111.	Thiele OC et al.: Interdisciplinary combined treatment of
craniofacial osteosarcoma with neoadjuvant and adjuvant
chemotherapy and excision of the tumour; a retrospective
study, Br J Oral Maxillofac Surg 46(7):356–533, 2008.
112.	Turc-Carel C et al.: Chromosomal translocations in Ewing’s
sarcoma, C R Seances Acad Sci III 296(23):1101–1103, 1983.
113.	Turc-Carel C et al.: Chromosome study of Ewing’s sarcoma
(ES) cell lines. Consistency of a reciprocal translocation
t(11;22)(q24;q12), Cancer Genet Cytogenet 12(1):1–19, 1984.
114.	Whang-Peng J et al.: Chromosome translocation in peripheral neuroepithelioma, N Engl J Med 311(9):584–585,
1984.
115.	Ambros IM et al.: MIC2 is a specific marker for Ewing’s sarcoma and peripheral primitive neuroectodermal tumors.
Evidence for a common histogenesis of Ewing’s sarcoma
and peripheral primitive neuroectodermal tumors from
MIC2 expression and specific chromosome aberration, Cancer 67(7):1886–1893, 1991.
116.	Lombart-Bosch A et al.: Histology, immunohistochemistry, and electron microscopy of small round cell tumors of
bone, Semin Diagn Pathol 13:153–170, 1996.
117.	Siegal GP et al.: Primary Ewing’s sarcoma involving the
head and neck, Cancer 60:2829–2840, 1987.
118.	Wood RE et al.: Ewing’s tumor of the jaw, Oral Surg Oral Med
Oral Pathol 69:120–127, 1990.
119.	Raney RB et al.: Ewing’s sarcoma of soft tissues in childhood: a report from the Intergroup Rhabdomyosarcoma
Study, 1972-1991, J Clin Oncol 15:574–582, 1997.
120.	Siebenrock KA et al.: Comparison of soft tissue Ewing’s sarcoma and peripheral neuroectodermal tumor, Clin Orthop
329:288–299, 1996.
121.	Eggli KD et al.: Ewing’s sarcoma, Radiol Clin North Am
31:325–337, 1993.
122.	Bielack SS, Carrle D: State-of-the-art approach in selective
curable tumors: bone sarcoma, Ann Oncol 19(Suppl 7):
155–160, 2008.
123.	Lichtenstein L: Histiocytosis X: integration of eosinophilic
granuloma of bone, Letterer-Siwe disease and SchüllerChristian disease as related manifestations of a single nosologic entity, Arch Pathol 56:84–102, 1953.

626

Chapter 28

n

Tumors of the Oral Soft Tissues and Cysts and Tumors of Bone

124.	Badalian-Very G et al.: Pathogenesis of Langerhans cell histiocytosis, Annu Rev Pathol Mech Dis 8:1–20, 2013.
125.	Writing Group of the Histiocyte Society: Histiocytosis syndromes in children, Lancet 1(8526):208–209, 1987.
126.	Lam KY: Langerhans’ cell histiocytosis (histiocytosis X),
Postgrad Med J 73:391–394, 1997.
127.	Valladeau J et al.: Langerin, a novel C-type lectin specific
to Langerhans cells, is an endocytic receptor that induces
the formation of Birbeck granules, Immunity 12(1):71–81,
2000.

128.	Hicks J, Flaitz CM: Langerhans cell histiocytosis: current insights in a molecular age with emphasis on clinical oral and
maxillofacial pathology practice, Oral Surg Oral Med Oral
Pathol Oral Radiol Endod 100(Suppl 2):42–66, 2005.
129.	McDonald JS et al.: Histiocytosis X: a clinical presentation,
J Oral Pathol 9:342–349, 1980.
130.	Ardekian L et al.: Clinical and radiographic features of eosinophilic granuloma in the jaws, review of 41 lesions treated by surgery and low-dose radiotherapy, Oral Surg Oral Med
Oral Pathol Oral Radiol Endod 87:238–242, 1999.

CHAPTER

29

Oral Surgery for the
Pediatric Patient
s Elie M. Ferneini and Jeffrey D. Bennett

For additional resources, please visit the

website.

CHAPTER OUTLINE
SIMPLE EXODONTIA
IMPACTED TEETH
Impacted Third Molars
Impacted Teeth Other than Third
Molars

O

ASSOCIATED HARD-TISSUE LESIONS
Odontoma
Odontogenic Cysts
SOFT-TISSUE PROCEDURES
Mucoceles and Ranulas
Fibroma and Pyogenic Granuloma

ffice-based pediatric oral surgical procedures include dentoalveolar surgery (primarily consisting
of exodontia), intraoral soft-tissue procedures
(e.g., frenectomy), medical and surgical management of
odontogenic infections, and intraoral surgical procedures
involving the alveolar ridge (e.g., enucleation of an odontoma). The basic principles used in the management of
these surgical conditions are essentially identical to those
used by the pediatric dentist in the management of the
various other dental diagnoses encountered.
The initial step in patient management is a diagnosis,
which is developed through a process involving history
taking, physical examination, and imaging. Once the decision to perform surgery is made, the practitioner should
visualize the various steps and their sequence, as well as
the potential complications and their management, before administering local anesthetic.
The pediatric patient’s ability to cooperate must be considered. Depending on the patient’s age, systemic health,
and planned surgery, the practitioner may consider using
nitrous oxide inhalational sedation, oral sedation, intramuscular sedation, intravenous sedation, or a combination
of these modalities. Regardless of the route of agent administration or the selection of pharmacologic agent, the primary consideration in sedating a pediatric patient is the depth
of sedation achieved. Oral sedation and nitrous oxide are
the agents most commonly used in the pediatric dental office. Nitrous oxide is advantageous in that it can be titrated,
achieving both rapid onset and recovery. The practi­tioner
must be aware that nitrous oxide when combined with an
oral agent (e.g., benzodiazepine or chloral hydrate) can
potentiate the effect of the oral agent, producing a more
profound depth of sedation and at times producing a depth
of sedation equal to that of general anesthesia.1 In fact, oral
sedation is frequently used in pediatric oral surgery. A recent
study showed adequate anxiolysis and sedative effects of
both oral midazolam and oral diazepam. However, intravenous midazolam produced more sedation.2

INFECTION OF THE HEAD AND NECK
REGION
Fracture of the Mandible
SUMMARY

General principles that apply to both the adult and
pediatric patient include profound anesthesia, aseptic
technique, visibility, and surgical site stability. Achieving
profound anesthesia depends on the clinician’s knowledge
of the anatomy of the second and third divisions of the
trigeminal nerve. This is discussed in Chapter 15.
Most office-based oral surgical procedures do not dictate adherence to sterile technique but require a clean
technique. The clean technique requires that the dentist
scrubs his or her hands with an antiseptic soap. The hands
may be dried using a nonsterile disposable towel. The
hands are then gloved. The dentist does not need to wear
a sterile gown but should wear a gown covering his or her
arms. A mask and eye protection are also used by the dentist. The gown, mask, and eye protection are as much for
the protection of the dentist as they are for the protection
of the patient. The perioral region and oral cavity do not
need to be decontaminated for a clean technique. However, only sterile water or sterile saline should be used for
irrigating a surgical wound. Surgical drills that are selfirrigating can accommodate the use of sterile irrigating
solutions. Last, the dentist may opt to drape the patient
and place protective eyewear on the patient. Draping and
eyewear maintain sterility in the sterile surgical field and
protect the patient from soiling of clothes or from having
debris or a suture injury to the eye. The clean technique
strives to achieve the basic premise of a sterile technique,
which is to prevent any organism from the surgical staff,
other patient, instrumentation, or equipment from contaminating the patient.
Adequate visibility is required for all dental procedures.
For oral surgical procedures this entails adequate access,
adequate light, and a good suction to create a debrisfree surgical field. Adequate access requires appropriate
mouth-opening. Opening the patient’s mouth and maintaining its opening can be facilitated with a bite block
(Fig. 29-1) or a Molt mouth prop. A small bite block may
be used and the degree of mouth-opening varied by its
627

628

Chapter 29

n

Oral Surgery for the Pediatric Patient

Figure 29-3 Minnesota retractor.
Figure 29-1 Two views of a bite block.

Figure 29-4 Weider “sweetheart” retractor.

Figure 29-2 Austin retractor.

placement in the mouth. For maximal mouth-opening,
the bite block is placed more posteriorly. A piece of floss
may be attached to the bite block. The knot securing the
floss to the bite block must be secure so that it does not
loosen. If the bite block is displaced into the pharynx, the
floss attached to the bite block extends out of the mouth,
assisting in retrieval of the bite block. The Molt mouth
prop has a ratchet-type action and can be used to assist
in opening the patient’s mouth. This can be beneficial in
the management of the uncooperative patient. Excessive
force could be applied with the Molt mouth prop, causing
iatrogenic injury, such as displacement of teeth or injury
to the temporomandibular joint. In addition to keeping the mouth open for the surgical procedure, the bite
block stabilizes the mandible. When a mandibular tooth
is extracted, use of the bite block minimizes mandibular
movement and the resultant transmission of excessive
forces to the temporomandibular joint.
Adequate access also requires appropriate retraction.
Commonly used retractors in oral surgery include the
Austin retractor (Fig. 29-2), the Minnesota retractor (Fig.
29-3), and the Weider retractor (Fig. 29-4). The Austin and
Minnesota retractors are usually used to retract the cheek

and surgical flaps. Tongue retraction is usually performed
with a Weider retractor, which is a heart-shaped retractor with a serrated edge. Retraction of the tongue with
the Weider retractor is best achieved by placement of the
lateral aspect of the retractor firmly against the alveolus.
Gauze or sponge packing may be placed just medial to the
retractor. This packing provides a barrier between the surgical site and the pharynx, preventing the tooth, surgical
debris, or irrigating solution from potentially being swallowed, aspirated, or irritating the pharynx. If the tongue
is retracted medially, the pharyngeal barrier is displaced
medially, opening up a passage between the mouth and
the pharynx, with potential stimulation of the gag reflex.
Care must also be taken not to position the retractor too
far posteriorly into the pharynx, which also stimulates
the gag reflex. Retraction may be performed either by the
dentist, using his or her nondominant hand, or by the
assistant.
Adequate visibility depends on the establishment of a
debris-free surgical field. This requires a good surgical
­assistant using high-speed surgical suction. The surgical
tray should have a Fraser suction tip (Fig. 29-5), which
is available in various sizes. The Fraser tip has an opening in the handle that allows for regulation of the suction power. The operator of the suction places his or her
thumb over the hole in the handle when the suction is

Chapter 29

n

Oral Surgery for the Pediatric Patient

629

Figure 29-5 Fraser suction tip.

placed on bone and maximal suction power is desired.
When less suction power is desired (e.g., when suctioning
soft tissue), the operator leaves the opening in the handle
open, which decreases the suction power. The practi­tioner
should also have a Yankauer or tonsillar suction device
available (Fig. 29-6). This suction removes significant
quantities of debris and, with its blunt tip, can be passed
blindly down the throat.

SIMPLE EXODONTIA
Indications for extractions for children are much the
same as those for adult patients: nonrestorable caries, apical disease, fractures of crowns or roots, prolonged retention of primary teeth because of improper root resorption
or ankylosis, impacted teeth, and supernumerary teeth.
The dentist must have an understanding of the growth
and development of the pediatric patient, to assess and
diagnose the situations that will be encountered. For example, the dentist should know the eruption patterns of
the primary and permanent teeth. Delayed eruption, especially when asymmetric, is frequently an indication of
an abnormality.
Radiographic surveys of teeth to be extracted are of
prime importance. The dentist should observe the size
and contour of the primary roots, the amount and type of
resorption, the relation of the roots to the succedaneous
teeth, and the extent of disease (Fig. 29-7).
Simple exodontia in the pediatric patient requires minimal modification from that used in the adult. Concepts
that may dictate slight modification include the following: (1) the dentist must be cognizant of the proximity
of the deciduous tooth to the succedaneous tooth and
(2) the roots on primary teeth with nonresorbed roots
will be long, slender, and potentially divergent.
The patient must be positioned appropriately for the
surgical procedure. For the extraction of a maxillary tooth,
the patient is positioned in the dental chair such that
the maxillary occlusal plane is at an angle between 60°
and 90° to the floor. For the extraction of a mandibular
tooth, the patient is positioned in the dental chair such
that the mandibular occlusal plane is parallel to the floor.
The height of the chair should be such that the patient’s
mouth is at or slightly below the level of the dentist’s elbow. The elbow of the surgeon’s dominant arm should be
against his/her body. When surgery is performed in the
dental office in a dental chair (compared with in the operating room on an operating room bed), the patient is usu-

Figure 29-6 Yankauer or tonsillar suction.

ally semisupine rather than completely supine. Patients
are generally more reclined for extractions of maxillary
teeth. There is an advantage for the sedated patient to be
positioned more upright and not fully supine. The pediatric patient’s ribs are angled more horizontally relative
to the vertebral column and the accessory muscles are less
developed, resulting in less effective thoracic expansion
and a greater dependence on diaphragmatic breathing.
Diaphragmatic breathing is compromised when the patient is supine; thus maintaining a more upright position
is respiratorily favorable, especially in the sedated patient.
The basic details are eloquently illustrated in more detail in the sixth edition of Contemporary Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery.3 The first step in extracting a tooth is
to separate the soft-tissue attachment from the cervical
aspect of the tooth. This is most commonly achieved
with a #9 Molt elevator (Fig. 29-8). The Molt elevator is
a dual-ended instrument with one end sharply pointed
and is used to initiate the separation of the soft-tissue
attachment from the tooth. The sharp pointed end of
this instrument is placed interproximally on the mesial
aspect of the papillae. The concave aspect of the instrument faces the tooth. Using a twisting motion, the dentist
elevates the papillae. The tip of the elevator is then slid
through the sulcus along the crest of the alveolar bone,
completely separating the buccal soft-tissue attachment
from the tooth. The same can be done on the lingual or
palatal aspect of the tooth. If a flap is reflected, the broad,
rounded end of the instrument may be used in a pushing
(concave aspect of instrument against bone) or a pulling
motion (instrument more perpendicular to bone with the
concave aspect of the instrument facing the direction of
movement) to reflect a full-thickness mucoperiosteal flap.
Extracting a tooth is an exercise in administering a controlled force in a slow and deliberate fashion to expand
the alveolus and disrupt the periodontal ligaments, such
that the tooth can be atraumatically removed from the
jaw. The second step in extracting a tooth is to use a dental elevator to luxate the tooth. A straight elevator (Fig.
29-9) is most commonly used; it has a concave blade that
is placed toward the tooth being luxated. The blades are
available in various sizes, and their edges may be serrated
to better grasp the tooth. The separation and reflection
of the dental papillae facilitate placement of the elevator
such that it rests on the alveolus. The elevator is initially
inserted perpendicular to the tooth in the axial plane, and

630

Chapter 29

n

Oral Surgery for the Pediatric Patient

Figure 29-7 Proximity of succedaneous teeth to roots of deciduous teeth.

Figure 29-8 #9 Molt elevator.

either parallel to or with the blade of the elevator angled
toward the alveolar crest up to 45° from the alveolar crest
in the coronal plane. The elevator is then turned such
that the portion of the blade resting on the alveolus acts
as a fulcrum and the coronal portion of the blade rotates
toward the tooth being extracted. This action expands
the alveolus, disrupts the periodontal ligament, and establishes initial mobility of the root. The degree of mobility need not be great to achieve benefit from an elevator.
Indeed, only limited movement can be achieved when
there are adjacent teeth. Excessive force can fracture the
tooth being extracted, converting a simple, closed extraction into an open extraction, or damage adjacent teeth or
restorations. The straight elevator may, in selected situations, be used as a wedge. In this situation once a space
has been created between the bone surrounding the tooth
socket and the tooth, the elevator is “wedged” between

the alveolar bone and the tooth. Wedging the elevator
inferiorly expands the alveolus, which facilitates extracting the tooth with forceps. Alternatively, as the elevator
is “wedged” apically into the space between the bone and
the tooth, the tooth is displaced coronally.
The last step in extracting a tooth is to remove the
tooth with forceps, which must be appropriately selected.
Several forceps are available in smaller sizes for the pediatric patient (Fig. 29-10). The basic principles in selecting
forceps are as follows:
1.	The beaks of the forceps should adapt to the root
surface of the tooth.
2.	The beaks of the forceps, when positioned and engaging the tooth, should be parallel to the long axis of
the tooth.
3.	The size of the beaks of the forceps should be small
enough not to engage the adjacent teeth during
luxation and removal of the tooth. The beaks of the
forceps should be placed under the separated and
reflected soft tissue and the tooth firmly engaged.
  
The first force applied by the dentist when using forceps
is apically directed. The apically directed force positions
the center of rotation as close to the root apex of the tooth
as possible. The more apical the center of rotation and the

Chapter 29

n

Oral Surgery for the Pediatric Patient

631

A

Figure 29-10 The armamentarium for exodontic procedures

in pediatric patients is much the same as that for adults,
even though all anatomic structures are smaller. Several
forceps for primary teeth offer some convenience; however,
they are not necessary to perform any of the extractions.
Large adult forceps, such as the “cowhorn” forceps, are
contraindicated in the pediatric patient.

B

C
Figure 29-9 A, Straight elevator. The straight elevator can

be placed at 45° to the occlusal plane, B, or parallel to the
occlusal plane, C.

closer it is to the apex of the tooth, the less the apical third
of the root is subjected to translational movement, and
the less likely an apical third root fracture will occur. The
apically directed force also disrupts the periodontal ligaments. With this force maintained, the tooth is luxated
toward the buccal and lingual/palatal aspects. Luxation is
slow. Movement is in one direction and then stopped, and
the alveolus is allowed to expand before movement begins
in the opposite direction. With each deliberate movement,
the force is increased, expanding the alveolus. Rapid,
jerky movements are ineffective and not recommended.

Rotational forces may be applied for selected roots that
are conical (anterior teeth, cuspids, mandibular premolars,
maxillary second premolars). The dentist’s opposite hand
may be placed such that the index finger or thumb is positioned on either the buccal and/or lingual/palatal aspect
of the alveolus and he/she can feel the expansion of the
alveolus. Finally, once the alveolus is sufficiently expanded and the periodontal ligament disrupted, slight coronal
tractional forces are applied and the tooth is removed.
In general, deciduous anterior teeth should be luxated
to the labial aspect during the extraction procedure because of the lingual position of the permanent teeth and
posterior teeth should be luxated with buccal and lingual
pressures. However, the dentist may know the direction
of least resistance and may deliver the tooth based on the
individual situation. Although they are rare, the dentist
must know when the roots of the deciduous molars are
configured such that they could engage the succedaneous
tooth and possibly cause the succedaneous tooth to be
extracted with the deciduous tooth. If this is recognized
radiographically or during the extraction, then sectioning the deciduous tooth with a surgical handpiece may
be indicated.
A traditional dental drill should not be used for surgical procedures. The surgical drill must vent its air away
from the surgical field. If a drill vents its air toward the
surgical site, there is significant risk for development of
air emphysema or an air embolism. Air emphysema is the
result of air being forced into the tissue planes under the
periosteal flap. This can cause a significant dissection of
the tissue planes, resulting in crepitus and swelling and
potentially causing airway problems. When the dentist
is drilling on bone, air could be forced into the vascular
channels within the bony canals. Air that is forced into

632

Chapter 29

n

Oral Surgery for the Pediatric Patient

these vascular channels can travel through the bloodstream and cause an embolus in more distant and vital
organs.
A root tip from a primary tooth may fracture during
the procedure; the dentist should attempt to remove it.
Proper use of an elevator will ideally have loosened the
root of the tooth, which facilitates root tip removal. However, if the dentist thinks that the attempt to remove the
root tip poses a significant risk to the adjacent or succedaneous tooth, then the residual root tip should be left
in the bone. Usually these root tips do not cause adverse
sequelae. They may eventually resorb or migrate toward
the gingiva and become exposed with the eruption of the
permanent tooth. A posttreatment radiograph should be
obtained, and the child’s parent should be informed. Informing the parent before the extraction and obtaining a
written consent listing the various potential complications
avoid having to present the complication as an unlikely
and unexpected sequela of surgery and the perception of
“poor-quality” treatment.
A primary tooth may be submerged or ankylosed. Ankylosed teeth may be slightly out of occlusion (Fig. 29-11)
or they may be completely within the alveolar process yet
show evidence of having once been in the mouth. A submerged tooth may have nonresorbed divergent roots or
may have all or nearly all the root resorbed. Despite having the root significantly resorbed, the tooth may show
no signs of mobility when pressure or leverage is applied
and exhibit a solid sound on percussion. These teeth may
be virtually welded to the surrounding bone. The radiographic and clinical examination may not entirely predict
the considerable difference in the degree of ankylosis and
what difficulties may be encountered in the removal of
the tooth. The basic principles pertaining to extraction
are followed. A tooth with nonresorbed divergent roots
in which the potential for a root fracture is high and the
path of draw is inadequate may be best extracted if the
tooth is sectioned. If luxation is not accomplished with
reasonable forceps pressure when the ankylosed tooth is
extracted, a surgical approach is required.
One such technique for surgical removal of an ankylosed tooth entails (1) the use of a bur to remove bone
around the tooth judiciously and conservatively until it
can be removed or (2) the use of a bur to carefully “drill

Figure 29-11 Ankylosed tooth.

away” the tooth. Frequently the difference between tooth
structure and bone cannot be determined clinically. Care
must be taken to minimize excessive bone removal and
avoid injury to another tooth. An intraoperative or postoperative radiograph may be indicated to assess the situation. The dentist may decide to leave a portion of the
residual root, which is rarely associated with any adverse
sequelae.

IMPACTED TEETH
An impacted tooth is one that fails to erupt. This may be
secondary to insufficient space in the dental arch (e.g.,
dental crowding or aberrant tooth development), mechanical obstruction secondary to a pathologic lesion
(e.g., odontoma), a supernumerary tooth, or malposed
tooth germs. Failure of a tooth to erupt may also be associated with genetic abnormalities.

IMPACTED THIRD MOLARS
The extraction of third molars is the most common surgical procedure in dentistry. It is therefore critical for
the pediatric dentist to understand the standard of care
for the treatment of the impacted third molars. Refer to
Contemporary Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery for a review
of surgical principles and techniques for extracting third
molars. There are multiple reasons for extracting a third
molar; however, the primary reason for the pediatric dentist to refer the patient to a surgeon for the extraction
of an impacted third molar is to limit the progression
of periodontal disease. Even though Ash and colleagues
raised this issue almost 50 years ago, the concept of prophylactically extracting third molars to prevent disease
versus extracting them when pathology develops remains
controversial.4
The extraction of third molars in the young patient,
however, is not necessarily deemed as preventive. Several publications from the Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery
Foundation’s and American Association of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgeons’ jointly sponsored Third Molar Clinical
Trials have demonstrated that “absence of symptoms does
not indicate absence of disease or pathology.” Analysis of
data from these studies has “demonstrated that periodontal pathology initiates in the mandibular third molar
region” and spreads throughout the mouth.5,6 Additionally, caries in erupted third molars increases in prevalence
with increasing age. Recent literature has also demonstrated an association of periodontal disease with systemic manifestations, further supporting the indications for
extracting third molars. One controversial issue regarding
mandibular third molars is the issue of their influence on
anterior crowding of mandibular teeth, especially after
orthodontic therapy. Multiple studies have been reported
that support both sides of this controversy. Even though
it is likely that third molars have a role in the etiology of
crowding, it may not be clinically significant.7
If it is advantageous to extract third molars, the timing
of this procedure should be such that it is performed with
the intent to optimize health and minimize potential risks
and complications. Optimal bone healing with improvement of intrabony defects on second molars adjacent to

Chapter 29

third molars has been shown to occur when surgery is
performed in individuals younger than 25 years of age.8
Risks associated with surgery, such as alveolar osteitis,
injury to the inferior alveolar nerve, and oroantral communication, have also been demonstrated to be higher
in individuals 25 years of age and older.9 Health-related
Quality of Life indicators are also better for younger
individuals.10

Case 1: Impacted Third Molars
A healthy 18-year-old male was referred to our office for
consultation regarding his third molars. For the past few
weeks, he had been experiencing increased discomfort in
the posterior mandible bilaterally. An intraoral examination revealed the oral soft tissue to be free of any lesions
with no evidence of acute infection. The mandibular
third molars were impacted with insufficient room for
functional eruption. The overlying operculum appeared
slightly inflamed with evidence of food debris and periodontal pockets of 6 mm on the distal of the left second
molar. The right mandibular second molar and maxillary
third molars were also impacted. Oral hygiene was fair. A
panoramic radiograph revealed four impacted third molars and an impacted right mandibular second molar (Fig.
29-12, A). Cone-beam imaging revealed a three-dimensional location of the right mandibular second and third
molars (see Fig. 29-12, B). The patient underwent surgical
extraction of his impacted third molars under IV sedation. A clinical photograph (see Fig. 29-12, C) revealed the

n

Oral Surgery for the Pediatric Patient

633

right mandibular second molar after the extraction of the
right mandibular third molar. A postoperative panoramic
radiograph was obtained to demonstrate the integrity of
the right mandibular second molar (see Fig. 29-12, D).

IMPACTED TEETH OTHER THAN THIRD MOLARS
The most commonly impacted tooth is the third molar.
Whereas any tooth can be impacted, other commonly impacted teeth seen by the dentist include (in this frequency) the maxillary canine, second premolar, mandibular
second molar, and maxillary incisors. Rare is the impaction or failure to erupt of a deciduous tooth. The latter is
commonly associated with pathology, such as an odontoma or supernumerary tooth. Commonly impacted supernumerary teeth managed by the pediatric dentist include
the mesiodens and supernumerary mandibular premolars.
The prevalence of impaction of the permanent maxillary canine is up to 2% (Fig. 29-13). Eight percent of the
time, the impaction occurs bilaterally. The occurrence of
an impacted canine is greater in female patients and has
a predilection of occurrence in individuals with a familial
history.11 The impacted maxillary canine is labially positioned 15% of the time and palatally positioned 85% of
the time. Arch length deficiency probably contributes to
the impaction of the labially positioned canine, whereas
it may not be a contributing factor with the palatally positioned canine.12
Most commonly, the second premolar is reported as
the next most frequently impacted tooth. The mandibular

A
B

C

D

Figure 29-12 A, Panoramic x-ray showing impacted third molars and a right mandibular second molar. B, Cone-beam imaging showing a 3-dimensional view of the impacted right mandibular second and third molars. C, A clinical photograph showing the right mandibular second molar after extraction of the third molar. D, Postoperative panoramic x-ray.

634

Chapter 29

n

Oral Surgery for the Pediatric Patient

Figure 29-13 Impacted cuspid.

premolar is more commonly impacted than the maxillary
premolar. The location of the impacted mandibular premolar is usually lingual or midalveolus, and that of the
maxillary premolar is palatal. Kaban and Troulis, however, reported the maxillary incisors as the tooth impacted
most frequently after the maxillary canine.13 They believe
that the frequency of impaction of the maxillary incisors
is most likely secondary to injury, infection, or loss of the
deciduous incisors. If the deciduous incisors are lost prematurely, a dense, hyperplastic, fibrous tissue may form
over the alveolus, which impedes eruption and contributes to the impaction of the permanent maxillary incisors.
Ideally, early recognition of an altered eruption pattern
and, if possible, interceptive serial extractions of deciduous
teeth and/or orthodontics can facilitate eruption. However, regardless of early recognition, a tooth may become
impacted. Once an altered eruption pattern is recognized,
the dentist must perform a clinical and radiographic examination. Palpation of the buccal, lingual, or palatal aspect
may reveal a bulge, suggesting the location of the impacted
tooth. When the tooth is not palpable, radiographic imaging is indicated to determine the location of the impacted
tooth. Several radiographic techniques can be used to
locate an impacted tooth. These are discussed in Chapter
2. Cone-beam technology has played an important role in
locating an impacted tooth.14,15
Management of an impacted tooth may include (1)
observation, (2) extraction of the impacted tooth, (3) surgical exposure and assisted eruption, (4) surgical uprighting, or (5) autotransplantation. Several factors need to be
taken into consideration in deciding the management of
the impacted tooth. These include the age and health of
the patient, potential pathology associated with the impacted tooth, location and angulation of the impacted
tooth, benefit of surgery, frequency and severity of the
risks of surgery, risks and consequences of no surgical intervention, and economic consequences of surgical versus
nonsurgical intervention and the quality of life associated
with each of these decisions.

This chapter does not discuss the treatment planning
decisions pertaining to whether to perform an extraction versus a surgical exposure or surgical uprighting. If
the decision is made to surgically expose the tooth and
facilitate eruption, care must be coordinated between/
among the appropriate dental colleagues. The first step
is to create and ensure that there is adequate space to accommodate the eruption of the impacted tooth. Surgical
exposure should not be performed until adequate space is
obtained. For example, if a premolar is to be extracted to
establish space for the exposure and eruption of a canine,
the orthodontic appliances should be in place before the
extraction of the premolar tooth. Although it is likely that
orthodontic tooth movement may not be initiated until
after the premolar tooth is extracted, the application of
orthodontic appliances establishes a commitment by the
patient to the planned treatment before the irreversible
extraction of the premolar tooth.

Surgical Exposure
The ideal time for surgical intervention to expose an impacted tooth is when the root of the impacted tooth is
almost completely formed and the apex is not yet closed.
Exposure of a palatally impacted tooth is frequently accomplished by making a sulcular incision between the
palatal tissue and teeth and reflection of a full-thickness
mucoperiosteal flap. The anterior and posterior extent of
the mucoperiosteal flap depends on the access required.
Frequently, a prominence or bulge is evident where the
impacted tooth’s crown lies. The bone overlying this bulge
may be thin and easily removed with a curette or periosteal elevator. For thicker bone, a surgical handpiece with
bur and copious irrigation or a chisel is used to remove
bone in a controlled manner, with care taken not to damage the tooth. Bone is removed to expose enough of the
palatal surface of the tooth’s crown so that an orthodontic bracket can be attached to aid in eruption. Depending
on the impaction and path of eruption, additional bone
may be removed to facilitate eruption. The exposed den-

Chapter 29

tal follicle is removed with a curette. Care must be exercised to maintain the integrity of bone around the crestal
margins of the adjacent teeth. Additionally, an impacted
tooth may be close to the roots of the adjacent teeth, and
care must be exercised not to damage or devitalize these
adjacent roots. The mucoperiosteal flap is repositioned
into its original position, and the soft tissue overlying the
impacted tooth’s crown is excised, exposing the crown
and orthodontic bracket. The gold chain attached to the
orthodontic bracket is passed through this window of
soft tissue and frequently secured to the orthodontic arch
wire with silk suture. The palatal mucoperiosteal flap is
anatomically aligned and secured with a resorbable suture. The soft-tissue window overlying the crown of the
impacted tooth can be left open or packed with a periodontal dressing for approximately 4 days. If the tooth
is deeply impacted within the palate, no overlying tissue
may be excised and the gold chain is brought through the
soft tissue at the crestal margin, frequently corresponding
with the incision.
When a labially impacted canine is exposed, a critical
component of the surgical outcome is the maintenance
of a cervical margin of attached mucosa on the erupted
impacted tooth. Two surgical techniques exist: (1) apical positioned flap and (2) closed technique. The apical
positioned flap technique consists of a horizontal crestal
incision that is made in the edentulous region with two
vertical releasing incisions on the mesial and distal aspects of this edentulous region. The flap is reflected and
the tooth is exposed, with bone removed to the cervical
margin as necessary. The bracket is attached and the flap
is repositioned apical to the bracket, ideally at the level
of the cervical margin of the tooth. The premise of the
apical positioned flap is to maintain a collar of attached
gingiva that will advance coronally as the tooth erupts (Fig.
29-14). The closed technique consists of a crestal-sulcular
incision with or without a vertical release that allows
for the development of a full-thickness mucoperiosteal
flap. The tooth is exposed, removing necessary bone,
and a bracket is attached. The gold chain attached to the
bracket is attached to the orthodontic arch bar, generally
with silk suture, and the flap is closed with resorbable suture. The gold chain generally exits the wound through
the crestal incision. The closed technique can be used for
all labially impacted canines; however, it is indicated for
high impactions or midalveolar impactions when the apical positioned flap is contraindicated. There may also be
a disadvantage with the apical positioned flap technique
in that it can contribute to increased crown length and
intrusive relapse.16 These basic principles are used for surgical exposure of most impacted teeth. With cone-beam
technology becoming more readily available, root resorption of adjacent teeth is observed due to maxillary canine
impaction.17

Case 2: Impacted Maxillary Canine
A healthy 14-year-old male was referred to our office by
his orthodontist for exposure and bracketing of his impacted right and left maxillary canines. Orthodontic treatment had begun a year previously, and sufficient arch
space accommodated the guided eruption of the impacted

n

Oral Surgery for the Pediatric Patient

635

Figure 29-14 Apically positioned flap.

canine. An intraoral examination revealed that orthodontic bands, brackets, and arch wires were in place. Retained
primary maxillary canines were present (Fig. 29-15, A).
The gingival and palatal tissue appeared healthy with no
notable periodontal defects. A panoramic radiograph revealed impacted right and left maxillary canines and retained primary maxillary canines (see Fig. 29-15, B). Conebeam imaging revealed the palatal location of both impacted canines (see Fig. 29-15, C). The patient underwent
surgical extraction of his maxillary primary canines and
exposure and bracket placement of his impacted maxillary
canines under nitrous oxide sedation (see Fig. 29-15, D).

Surgical Uprighting
Surgical uprighting is a technique that has most commonly been used for bringing an impacted mandibular
second molar into occlusion (Fig. 29-16).18 The optimal
time for performing the procedure is when the root is
two-thirds formed and the apex is open. The tooth should
have a mesial inclination not exceeding 90° and should
be neither labially nor lingually inclined, for optimal results.19 Excessive mesial inclination has an increased risk
for devascularizing the tooth. In this situation the surgical
procedure would be more consistent with an autotransplantation than a surgical uprighting. Excessive labial or
lingual inclination is associated with diminished crestal
bone on the respective surface, compromising initial stability and ultimate bone height on that respective surface
of the tooth.
The surgical technique entails the making of a sulcular
incision that extends from the mesial of the first molar
to the distal buccal of the second molar. The incision is
then extended distally along the alveolar crest angling
into the buccal sulcus along the external oblique ridge.
A full-thickness mucoperiosteal flap is reflected. Adequate
space must be created distal to the impacted second molar tooth. Prophylactic removal of the third molar is commonly performed. Using a surgical drill with a bur, the
dentist may find it necessary to remove bone on the distal aspect of the second molar to the level of its greatest
concavity. This ensures that there is adequate space into
which the impacted second molar can move. An elevator is then used to elevate and reposition the tooth. The
repositioned tooth should be slightly out of occlusion.
Most frequently, the surgically uprighted tooth is stable
in its new position and requires no additional stabilization. If the tooth is mobile, it should be splinted with an

636

Chapter 29

n

Oral Surgery for the Pediatric Patient

B

A

D

C
Figure 29-15 A, Preoperative photograph showing the retained primary maxillary canines. B, Panoramic x-ray showing the
impacted maxillary canines. C, Cone-beam imaging showing the palatal location of the impacted maxillary canines.
D, Postoperative clinical photograph.

orthodontic arch wire for approximately 2 weeks. The mucoperiosteal flap is approximated into position, accommodating the newly uprighted tooth, and sutured. Antibiotics
are generally prescribed for the first week. Prophylactic
endodontic therapy is generally not required.

Case 3: Surgical Uprighting

Figure 29-16 Mesially impacted mandibular second molar.

A healthy 17-year-old female patient was referred to our
office for consultation regarding her third molars and
impacted mandibular right second molar. Orthodontic treatment had been completed 6 months previously.
An intraoral examination revealed the oral soft tissue to
be free of any lesions, with no evidence of acute infection. The mandibular third molars were impacted, with
insufficient room for functional eruption. The overlying
operculum appeared slightly inflamed with no evidence
of food debris, and periodontal pockets of 4 mm existed
on the distal of the mandibular second molars. The right
mandibular second molar was also mesially impacted (Fig.
29-17, A). Additionally, the maxillary third molars were
impacted. Oral hygiene was fair. A panoramic radiograph
revealed four impacted third molars and an impacted
right mandibular second molar (see Fig. 29-17, B). The patient underwent surgical extraction of her impacted third
molars and uprighting of her right mandibular second

Chapter 29

n

Oral Surgery for the Pediatric Patient

637

B
A

D

C
Figure 29-17 A, Preoperative clinical photograph showing the mesially impacted right mandibular second molar. B, Panoramic

x-ray showing four impacted wisdom teeth and the mesially impacted right mandibular second molar. C, Intraoperative photograph after extraction of the right mandibular third molar and surgical uprighting of the right mandibular second molar.
D, Postoperative panoramic x-ray.

molar under IV sedation. An intraoperative clinical photograph (see Fig. 29-17, C) showed the right mandibular
second molar after the extraction of the right mandibular
third molar and surgical uprighting of the right mandibular second molar. A postoperative panoramic radiograph
was obtained (see Fig. 29-17, D).

Extraction of Impacted Teeth Other
Than Third Molars
The extraction of a non–third molar impacted tooth entails many of the techniques described pertaining to the
exposure of the impacted tooth. However, a few critical
points may differ. The supernumerary impacted tooth or
the unerupted succedaneous tooth that is scheduled to
be extracted may be deeply impacted. Complications associated with extraction may include injury to adjacent
tooth roots or vital structures, such as the inferior alveolar
nerve. Localization of the deeply impacted tooth may be
achieved with cone-beam computed tomography (CT).
The cone-beam CT may provide a better image, demonstrating the exact location of the tooth and its proximity to adjacent roots and vital structure, and may also be
beneficial for localizing teeth that will be exposed. The
technique cannot be considered standard of care at this
time and probably should not become standard of care
for many impacted teeth that are readily palpable.

A full-thickness mucoperiosteal envelope flap is created
with or without a vertical release. If a vertical release is used
to facilitate access, the vertical releasing incision should
be made away from the planned extraction. Usually the
crown of the tooth is exposed. When the impacted tooth
is extracted, the objective is to minimize the amount of
bone removal. To facilitate extraction of the tooth with
minimal bone removal, the tooth may be sectioned such
that the crown and root are removed separately.

ASSOCIATED HARD-TISSUE LESIONS
ODONTOMA
Odontomas are the most frequently occurring odontogenic tumors seen in pediatric patients (Fig. 29-18). They
are frequently discovered when the patient presents for
evaluation of an unerupted tooth or incidentally during
routine radiographic examination. There are two types of
odontomas: compound and complex. A compound odontoma represents multiple toothlike structures. A complex
odontoma has irregularly shaped masses of enamel with
no anatomic resemblance to a tooth. Treatment for an
odontoma involves simple enucleation and curettage.
Enucleation is usually carried out intraorally. A mucoperiosteal flap of sufficient size is elevated to expose

638

Chapter 29

n

Oral Surgery for the Pediatric Patient

the permanent tooth has erupted and complete healing
has occurred.
An eruption cyst is a cystlike lesion caused by eruption
trauma of either primary or permanent teeth. Usually seen
in erupting molar areas, it usually resolves spontaneously
when the involved tooth penetrates the gingival tissue.

Case 4: Traumatic Bone Cyst

Figure 29-18 Odontoma.

the tumor. If required, the overlying bone is removed by
means of a round or tapered fissure bur. The odontoma is
well-encapsulated and can be curetted from the surrounding bone. The specimen is sent for biopsy. The surgical
site is irrigated with normal saline, and the wound is reapproximated with resorbable sutures.

ODONTOGENIC CYSTS
The dentigerous cyst is the most common odontogenic
cyst in the pediatric population. It is usually associated
with an unerupted permanent tooth or with a supernumerary tooth. Traumatic cysts are also common, especially in
active young patients. They are usually unilateral and
solitary. Appropriate imaging should be obtained when
the dentist suspects a cyst or lesion in the pediatric patient.
A biopsy is preferable before definitive surgery. However,
if a general anesthetic is required to manage the pediatric
patient for a lesion in which the dentist is most confident
about the diagnosis, it is usually preferable to perform the
definitive procedure and obtain histological evaluation
on this specimen with the intent that only one general
anesthetic will be necessary. Aspiration is always advised
before biopsy to rule out a vascular lesion.
The initial step in managing a cystic lesion is to aspirate the wound. Aspiration of the cystic cavity assists
the dentist with differential diagnosis and allows the
dentist to rule out a vascular lesion. The treatment of
a dentigerous cyst involves complete enucleation of the
cyst and its epithelial lining. If an impacted third molar
is involved with the cyst, removal of the tooth is indicated. Otherwise, an effort should be made to save the involved permanent tooth to help preserve the integrity of
the dental arch. Although a dentigerous cyst is a benign
cyst lined by squamous epithelium, this epithelium has a
potential to undergo neoplastic change (e.g., ameloblastoma). Postoperative observation should continue until

A 15-year-old male patient was referred for evaluation of a
lesion on his right mandible. The patient’s medical history
was significant for Burkitt’s lymphoma and CMT (CharcotMarie-Tooth disease). The patient had been in orthodontic
treatment for a year. The radiolucency was found as an
incidental finding on a panoramic radiograph. An intraoral examination revealed a normal examination with no
soft-tissue lesions or buccolingual expansion. The right
mandibular first and second molars had normal vitality
tests. The panoramic radiograph revealed a unilocular radiolucent lesion between the roots of the right mandibular
first and second molars (Fig. 29-19, A). A maxillofacial CT
scan revealed a 1.4 × 1 cm lucent area in the right mandible below the first and second molars. An incisional biopsy was performed with the patient under nitrous oxide
sedation. A bony window was created to provide access to
the lesion (see Fig. 29-19, B), and 1-mL of serosanguineous
fluid was aspirated from the empty cavity (see Fig. 29-19,
C). Upon examination and biopsy findings, the lesion was
determined to be consistent with a traumatic bone cyst.

SOFT-TISSUE PROCEDURES
The pediatric dentist is frequently involved in the management of several minor intraoral soft-tissue lesions. This
section discusses commonly seen soft-tissue pathologic
conditions: mucocele, ranula, fibroma, and pyogenic
granuloma. Lingual and labial frenectomies are discussed
in Chapters 13 and 3, respectively.

MUCOCELES AND RANULAS
A mucocele or mucous retention cyst is a benign pathologic lesion resulting from the extravasation of saliva
from an injured minor salivary gland. The collection of
extravasated fluid develops a fibrous wall around itself,
forming a pseudocyst. The lesion can fluctuate in size, depending on its fluid-filled state. A decrease in lesion size is
frequently associated with a history of drainage of a thick
viscous fluid. The lesion is nonpainful, soft, doughy, and
fluctuant to palpation. Clinically, the overlying mucosa
may have the same coloration as the lower lip or have a
bluish hue. Lesions of longer duration may appear firmer
and fibrotic and be difficult to distinguish from a fibroma.
A mucocele most likely results secondary to a traumatic
event that, in most situations, goes unrecognized. The
lower lip is the most common location.
The basic premise in excising a mucocele is to remove the
fibrous capsule and any associated minor salivary glands.
For a lesion within the lip, the lip is frequently everted
and stretched. This stabilizes the lesion. A Kazanjian
retractor can be used to isolate and stabilize the ­lesion.
An elliptical incision (staying within the confines of the
lesion) is made in the lip perpendicular to the fibers of

Chapter 29

n

Oral Surgery for the Pediatric Patient

639

A
B

C
Figure 29-19 A, Panoramic x-ray showing a unilocular radiolucent lesion between the roots of the right mandibular first and
second molars. B, Intraoperative photograph showing the surgical access to the lesion. C, 1cc of serosanguinous fluid aspirated from the lesion.

the orbicularis oris muscle. By a combination of sharp
and blunt dissection, the fibrous capsule of the lesion is
separated from the surrounding tissue. If done properly,
the mucocele can be removed intact. All minor salivary
glands surrounding the lesion and within the surgical field
should be removed. Removal of the surrounding minor
salivary glands minimizes the potential for recurrence.
Hemostasis is controlled and closure is accomplished with
a 4-0 resorbable suture. The lip is a prominent area, and
it may be challenging for the smaller child to not disturb
the wound during healing. The suture knots should be
buried, and an extra suture to ensure integrity of the closure may prevent the wound from dehiscing (Fig. 29-20).
A ranula is a mucous retention cyst that occurs in the
floor of the mouth and is associated with the sublingual
gland. A ranula in a young pediatric patient needs to be differentiated from a lymphatic malformation. A ranula may
be managed by marsupialization or excision of the sublingual gland. Many surgeons initially manage a ranula with
marsupialization and perform an excision of a sublingual
gland secondarily if the ranula recurs, although some surgeons think that there is a high incidence of recurrence
with marsupialization and choose excision of the sublingual gland as their primary surgical intervention. The first
step before either of the two procedures is performed is
identification and cannulation of the ipsilateral submandibular duct. The mucosa overlying the lesion is then excised. With marsupialization, the lining of the pseudocyst
cavity is then sutured to the overlying mucosa of the floor

of the mouth. A Penrose drain may be sutured in place
to maintain the definitive communication between the
pseudocyst and oral cavity. If the intent is to excise the
sublingual gland, once the overlying mucosa is excised,
blunt dissection is used to identify and isolate the sublingual gland. Extraoral pressure elevating the floor of the
mouth can facilitate this process. Anterior traction of the
gland may also facilitate dissection. The lingual nerve and
submandibular duct, which are in close proximity to the
deep surface of the sublingual gland, should be identified
before definitive excision, to minimize iatrogenic injury.
The wound is loosely closed.

Case 5: Mucocele
A healthy 11-year-old male patient was referred to our
office for consultation regarding a right lower lip lesion
that had been present for 6 months. The patient, a hockey
player, reported a history of repeated trauma to his lower
lip. An intraoral examination revealed a nonpainful, soft,
fluctuant lesion on his right lower lip. The lesion measured 5 × 5 mm (Fig. 29-21, A). An excisional biopsy was
performed with the patient under nitrous oxide sedation
(see Fig. 29-21, B). The specimen was consistent with a
mucocele (see Fig. 29-21, C).

FIBROMA AND PYOGENIC GRANULOMA
The pediatric patient may present with other soft-tissue
lesions. Common lesions found in the pediatric patient
include both the fibroma and the pyogenic granuloma.

640

Chapter 29

n

Oral Surgery for the Pediatric Patient

A

B
Figure 29-20 Mucocele and stages of surgical excision.

A, An elliptical incision made with a combination of blunt
and sharp dissection. B, The mucocele sac is separated from
the surrounding mucosa.

Oral pathology is discussed elsewhere in this text. If the
lesion is small, it may be excised completely, and the
specimen submitted for histological evaluation. This can
usually be accomplished by an elliptical incision made
within normal tissue around the lesion. The depth of the
dissection is determined by the appearance and feel of
the lesion. Minor modifications to this basic technique
are dependent on the differential diagnosis. For example,
removal of interproximal tissue and scaling of teeth may
be indicated when a pyogenic granuloma is excised, to
ensure complete removal and minimize recurrence.

INFECTION OF THE HEAD AND
NECK REGION
This section focuses on infections of odontogenic etiology.
However, whereas the etiology of head and neck infections
may be odontogenic, the etiology may also be secondary
to sinus, salivary gland, skin, or middle ear conditions.
Defining the etiology is critical to the management of the
infection because the infection may persist and potentially
worsen if the cause is not removed and the appropriate

antibiotic is not selected based on the etiology. Infections
can progress rapidly in both the pediatric patient and the
adult patient; however, the pediatric patient is especially
susceptible to becoming rapidly dehydrated and systemically ill from what may appear to be a relatively minor
infection.
This discussion provides a protocol for the management of the pediatric patient with a head and neck infection. Similar to cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR)/
basic life support (BLS), which provides an algorithm and
a sequence for managing the airway, breathing, and circulation, this section provides a logical sequence for assessing and treating the patient. An experienced individual
can assess the situation and perform CPR simultaneously;
likewise, the experienced dentist may perform several of
these assessments and interventions simultaneously.
The first step in managing the pediatric patient with a
head and neck infection is to obtain a history, including
details about both the patient’s present illness and the
patient’s past medical and surgical history. The history
of the present illness must include: (1) onset; (2) rate of
progression; (3) history of preceding odontogenic pain,
upper respiratory infection, sinus pain, otitis media;
(4) airway compromise (dysphagia, dyspnea, change in
voice); (5) trismus; and (6) ophthalmic complaints (e.g.,
photophobia, changes in visual acuity). It may be difficult to elicit a complete history from a younger patient when neither the patient nor the parent is able to
provide a history of preceding odontogenic pain. The
dentist must obtain a complete past medical history.
In the management of a patient with an infection, it is
important to identify diseases that compromise the immune system (e.g., diabetes) and the patient’s ability to
withstand stress (e.g., congenital heart disease). The latter
is important because a severe infection can impose severe
physiologic stress on the patient, whose ability to res­
pond to the infection may be dependent on his or her
systemic reserve.
The second step in managing the pediatric patient
with a head and neck infection is to examine the patient.
The clinical examination includes visual inspection, identifying the: (1) patient’s respiratory compromise, distress,
or lack of distress; (2) involved swelling and the severity thereof; (3) palpation of the tissues to discern their
tenderness and consistency (cellulitic or fluctuant); (4)
assessment of maximal mouth-opening; and (5) examination of the dentition. The radiographic examination may
consist of a periapical or panoramic radiograph, which
can be obtained in the office. The panoramic radiograph
is a good screening radiograph. A periapical radiograph
may provide more discerning information; however, this
may be difficult to obtain if the child’s head and neck
are swollen. Severe fascial space infections require a CT
scan with contrast to delineate the full involvement of
the infection. A differential diagnosis is developed from
the history and examination.
The dentist must be knowledgeable about the anatomic
spaces of the head and neck and the routes in which
infection can spread. The routes of dissemination of an
infection are dependent on the position of the roots of the
teeth relative to anatomic considerations, such as muscles,

Chapter 29

A

n

Oral Surgery for the Pediatric Patient

641

B

C
Figure 29-21 A, Clinical photograph of a right lower lip lesion. B, Postoperative clinical photograph. C, Surgical specimen.

maxillary sinus, and root angulation relative to their respective jaws. For example, a vestibular space infection
is the result of an infection dissecting through the lateral
maxillary or mandibular bone and perforating the buccal bone inferior (maxilla) or superior (mandible) to the
buccinator muscle attachment. The maxillary teeth can
result in a canine space infection, which can extend and
ultimately involve the periorbital tissues. The proximity
of the maxillary teeth to the maxillary sinus can produce
maxillary sinusitis. Posterior spread of a maxillary infection can involve the infratemporal space and spread directly into the orbital tissues through the inferior orbital
fissure. Mandibular molar infections can spread above or
below the mylohyoid muscle, resulting in a sublingual
space or submandibular space infection, respectively. An
infection of the sublingual space displaces the tongue superiorly and posteriorly. Posteriorly, a mandibular infection
may spread either lateral to the ramus or medial to the
ramus, resulting in either a submasseteric space or a pterygomandibular and/or lateral pharyngeal space infection,
respectively. The submasseteric space, the pterygomandibular space, and the infratemporal space comprise the
masticator space. Infections of the masticator space result
in trismus. Infections of the sublingual, submandibular,
submental, and masticator space can compromise airway
integrity. Although rare, infections of the head and neck
may have hematogenous spread via the valveless veins of
the face and cause central neurologic infections.

The third step in managing the pediatric patient with
a head and neck infection is to develop a plan of intervention, beginning with an assessment of the airway. Urgent airway intervention may be indicated based on the
involved fascial spaces, their severity, the patient’s signs
and symptoms, and the progression of the infection.
Managing a patient with a compromised airway requires a
team approach between the surgeon (capable of performing a tracheostomy, if necessary) and the anesthesiologist. This is a challenging situation in an adult, in whom
the induction of a sedative state or general anesthetic
may worsen an already compromised airway. In situations where the airway is compromised, the adult patient
may be fiberoptically intubated with minimal sedation.
The fearful pediatric patient lacks the ability to cooperate,
necessitating a more profound depth of sedation, which
potentially makes airway management more challenging
and dangerous.
Once the airway is assessed and controlled, the practitioner must continue with the interventional plan development. The components of intervention include (1)
determining whether the infection should be treated in
an outpatient or inpatient setting, (2) establishing the appropriate antibiotics to use, and (3) undertaking surgery
(incision and drainage and removal of the etiology). Indications for admitting a pediatric patient to the hospital
include fever (temperature <101.5°F), lymphadenopathy,
elevated white blood cell count (WBC), poor oral intake,

642

Chapter 29

n

Oral Surgery for the Pediatric Patient

dehydration, involved fascial spaces, associated findings
(e.g., dysphagia), and the appearance of being ill (i.e.,
looking sick). The latter item should not be disregarded;
this is one situation in which the general appearance of
the patient provides significant guidance.
Odontogenic infections are polymicrobial. There is a
significant increase in resistance to antibiotics that has
developed over the past couple of decades, especially to
beta-lactamase–producing organisms. The antibiotic for a
less severe odontogenic infection that is to be managed in
an outpatient setting is penicillin VK (25 to 50 mg/kg per
day in divided doses every 6 to 8 hours) or clindamycin
(10 to 20 mg/kg per day in divided doses every 6 hours).20
Because of the increase in beta-lactamase–producing organisms, the first-line antibiotics for infections requiring hospitalization are intravenous ampicillin-sulbactam
(Unisyn) or intravenous clindamycin. Hospitalization
facilitates supportive care, such as providing hydration,
nutritional support, and fever management.
Surgery includes incision and drainage and removal
of the source of infection (which may involve pulpectomy or extraction). In our opinion, if hospitalization is
required, the offending tooth should be extracted. The
following are basic principles for performing an incision
and drainage. If the patient is not going to have a general anesthetic, the site must be anesthetized with local
anesthesia. Regional block anesthesia without infiltrating the infective site is recommended. A Gram stain and
culture and sensitivity (C&S) test are indicated for all
fascial space infections (not including a vestibular space
infection), immunocompromised patients, or infections
that have failed multiple courses of antibiotic treatment.
Ideally, the dentist obtains an aspirate for a Gram stain
and C&S before making the incision and drainage. Before
the infection is incised, a needle on a syringe is inserted
into the wound and its contents aspirated. The aspirate
is submitted for Gram stain and C&S. When a vestibular
space infection is drained, an incision is made, frequently centered within the swelling. The incision is carried
through the mucosa down and through the periosteum.
The dentist must have knowledge of the anatomy to
avoid vital structures, such as the mental nerve and facial
artery. A small hemostat (mosquito) is inserted with the
beaks closed. Blunt dissection is performed with the beaks
closed. The beaks are opened and withdrawn. The hemostat beaks are never closed blindly when the instrument
is in the wound, to prevent injury to vital structures. A
Penrose drain may be placed into the incision and drainage site and secured with a nonresorbable suture for a few
days. The drain keeps the wound open and patent, facilitating irrigation (if necessary) and spontaneous drainage
of the wound and preventing a recurrent collection from
developing. Refer to a surgical text for more detailed information pertaining to draining fascial spaces.20

FRACTURE OF THE MANDIBLE
The pediatric dentist may encounter pediatric patients
who have suffered a traumatic event and injured the soft
and/or hard tissue of the face. These injuries can include
soft-tissue lacerations, dentoalveolar injuries, and facial
fractures of the maxilla, mandible, nose, and cheek. Prob-

ably the most common injury that the pediatric dentist
sees is the dentoalveolar injury, which includes intrusion
and avulsion of teeth, crown and tooth fractures, and alveolar fractures. Diagnosis and assessment of these injuries are discussed elsewhere.21 The mandibular fracture is
the most common skeletal injury that occurs in the pediatric age group seen within the hospital. However, the
patient with a mandibular fracture may initially present
to the pediatric dentist, who must be able to recognize the
injury and make the appropriate referral.
When assessing a patient who presents with a facial
injury, the treating doctor must recognize that the patient can have associated injuries. A history of the events
contributing to the event and a comprehensive physical
evaluation are important and must be completed. The
treating doctor must also be cognizant that the force required to cause a facial fracture is directed to the head
and neck, and could result in neurologic or cervical injury. Understanding the mechanism of injury may present some insight. The doctor should inquire as to loss
of consciousness or symptoms suggestive of neurologic
injury (e.g., dizziness, lightheadedness, amnesia of the
event, nausea and vomiting). In the awake adult individual, cervical trauma is assessed frequently by clinical
examination and the patient’s ability to relate whether
or not neck pain is present. In the younger patient who
cannot reliably relate whether or not neck pain is present,
radiographic assessment may be indicated. The pediatric
dentist must be cognizant that the pediatric patient may
sustain cervical injuries, as well as other injuries secondary to the mechanism of injury, and manage the patient
to minimize those potential adverse consequences. For example, if there is any question that the patient has sustained a cervical injury, the patient should be supinely
positioned and EMS contacted for transportation to the
emergency department.
The first step in assessing the patient who presents
with a facial injury is to obtain a comprehensive history.
The younger patient may be less able to provide reliable
answers. These questions include:
1.	“Where does it hurt?” “What makes it hurt?”
2.	“Can you open your mouth?” (Does the patient have
any limitation of jaw movement? Is the bite different?)
3.	“Do you have any loose teeth?”
4.	“Do your lips feel different?” “Are your lips numb?”
  
The answers to these questions may reveal the patient’s diagnosis. A patient may complain of pain in the
temporomandibular joint, suggestive of a hemarthrosis
or a condylar fracture. On clinical examination the patient may have a chin abrasion or laceration. The force
of a blunt trauma to the region of the chin that results
in an abrasion or laceration may be transmitted to the
condylar region. Thus a chin abrasion or laceration in a
patient complaining of pain in the temporomandibular
joint may support the suspicion of an injury to the joint.
Alternatively, a patient who presents with a chin abrasion
or laceration secondary to blunt force should be assessed
for pain in the joint that may be suggestive of a condylar
fracture.
Bony or muscular injury can result in limited mobility
of the jaw because of pain, bony mechanical obstruction,

Chapter 29

joint or soft-tissue swelling, or muscular inflammation or
irritability. A unilateral condylar injury may result in deviation to the ipsilateral side with opening in the occlusion secondary to the action of the contralateral lateral
pterygoid muscle.
Fractures of the mandible can result in a malocclusion.
Unilateral condylar fractures usually result in an ipsilateral premature bite. Bilateral condylar fractures may result in bilateral shortened rami with a resultant anterior
open bite and mandibular retrognathia. A hemarthrosis
of the condyle may result in an ipsilateral posterior open
bite secondary to the joint swelling and inferior displacement of the rami. Because of the elasticity of the pediatric
mandible, a fracture may not always result in displacement and a resultant malocclusion. The practitioner must
be diligent and assess for tenderness of the region, which
may be an indication of an injury. Hemorrhage into the
tissue associated with the fracture may result in localized
ecchymosis in the buccal or lingual vestibule. A fracture
may result in gingival tearing. The findings may be more
subtle, with slight evidence of sulcular blood along the
teeth adjacent to the fracture. Teeth adjacent to the fracture may be loose. This must be distinguished from an
avulsive type of injury, an alveolar fracture, or the normal
resorptive pattern present in a mixed dentition. Palpation
of the mandible may identify a step along the inferior
border. Bimanual palpation may demonstrate segmental
mobility or elicit discomfort.
The bony canal of the inferior alveolar nerve traverses
the rami and the body of the mandible. A mandibular
fracture may result in hemorrhage into the canal with a
resultant compressive type injury, or the nerve may sustain a contusion, a stretching-type lesion, or a partial or
complete transection. Paresthesia occurs as a result of the
nerve injury. In most situations in which the fracture segments are not grossly displaced, the paresthesia is transient and recovery occurs over the next several weeks to
months. Pediatric patients are less able to report various
symptoms and may not be able to express that they are
paresthetic.
Radiographic examination of the mandible in the office usually includes a panoramic radiograph. This image
is useful and reliable in visualizing the entire mandible,
including the condyles, rami, angle, body, and symphysis. Radiographic assessment ideally should occur in two
planes. A condylar/subcondylar fracture may not always
be recognized on a panoramic radiograph. Additionally,
the panoramic radiograph does not demonstrate the lateral/medial displacement of the fracture segments in the
coronal plane, as demonstrated on a Towne’s view. A
fracture that is not clearly visualized on the panoramic
radiograph may be identified on the Towne’s view. The
symphysis may be outside the ideal trough of the panoramic radiograph, and a nondisplaced or greenstick fracture may not be clearly seen on a panoramic image. A
mandibular occlusal radiograph at 90° to the mandible
should be obtained when a mandibular symphyseal fracture is suspected and is not seen on a Panorex. For the
patient who presents to the emergency department, CT
imaging is becoming more regularly used and is replacing
more traditional flat-plane imaging. The CT scan provides

n

Oral Surgery for the Pediatric Patient

643

images in the axial, coronal, and sagittal views. Threedimensional reconstruction is also available and should
be requested. It is important to have all of these images
available because a fracture may be easily visible and recognized on only one of them.
The discussion of managing the pediatric patient focuses on the patient with a mixed dentition. Treatment of
a mandibular fracture includes reduction of the fractured
segments, reestablishment of a stable occlusion, and stabilization of the fractured segments. Fractures in pediatric
patients can heal rapidly, and treatment should ideally be
initiated within the first days after injury. If for various
medical conditions or associated injuries fracture reduction is not initiated within the first few days, the bony
segments may begin to heal and reduction may become
difficult, if not impossible. One advantage in managing
pediatric patients with mixed dentition is that minor
malocclusions usually self-correct with growth.
Condylar fractures can be classified as either intracapsular or extracapsular. A pediatric patient who has sustained an intracapsular fracture or injury is at increased
risk of ankylosis or growth disturbance. Treatment is frequently dictated by the degree of malocclusion and jaw
opening/function. If the occlusion is grossly normal, the
fracture may be managed with a blenderized diet, analgesics if necessary, and observation. Physiotherapy to ensure symmetric opening may be indicated. If the pediatric
patient has a malocclusion or significant pain, a short period of 7 to 10 days of maxillomandibular fixation may
be warranted. The risk of rami shortening and an anterior
open bite is a concern in a patient who has sustained a
bilateral condylar fracture, and the practitioner may more
readily consider a period of maxillomandibular fixation.
The use of guiding elastics for a period of 1 to 2 weeks
after the release of maxillomandibular fixation may be
beneficial to facilitate symmetric opening. Open reduction and fixation, even for a displaced condylar fracture
in the pediatric patient, are rarely indicated. Slight malocclusions usually self-correct with growth.
Management of a nondisplaced body or symphysis
fracture may also be achieved with a blenderized diet
and observation. When maxillomandibular fixation is required (for either a nondisplaced or displaced fracture),
the patient is frequently placed in fixation for a period
of approximately 3 weeks. An alternative to maxillomandibular fixation for a body or symphysis fracture is the
placement of a lingual splint, which is secured to the
teeth with either circumdental or circumandibular wires.
The advantage of the splint is that it does not require the
patient’s jaws to be wired closed. This facilitates respiratory care and nutritional support in the seriously injured
patient. A disadvantage of a lingual splint is that it may
require a separate anesthetic to take the impression necessary to make the splint. If the patient is having multiple
injuries managed during the same operation, the dental
surgical team may take the maxillary and mandibular impression at the beginning of the operation, fabricate the
splint, and have it ready to be placed before termination
of the anesthetic. Angle fractures or fractures posterior to
the teeth require maxillomandibular fixation for 3 weeks.
Open reduction and internal fixation (ORIF) are an option

644

Chapter 29

n

Oral Surgery for the Pediatric Patient

in managing the pediatric patient. Care must be taken to
avoid succedaneous developing teeth. The authors have
rarely found it necessary to perform an ORIF of a pediatric mandibular fracture. Slight malocclusions usually selfcorrect with growth.
Maxillomandibular fixation is traditionally achieved
by ligation of an arch bar to the teeth in each arch with
circumdental wires placed around the cervical collars of
the teeth. The shape and shortness of the deciduous teeth
may make this difficult at times. The arch bar provides
hooks (with the opening apically positioned) that can
be used to secure wires or elastics to achieve either tight
maxillomandibular fixation with absolute lack of movement or to place elastics that allow for limited function
and guide the patient’s opening and occlusion. If the
patient’s dentition does not facilitate circumdental wiring, the practitioner may opt to use skeletal wiring either
alone or in combination with circumdental wiring. Skeletal fixation consists of circumandibular wires, piriform
wires, and zygomatic buttress wires. A circumandibular
wire is placed around the mandible. The wire is inserted
extraorally using a Keith needle or an awl. The inferior
border of the mandible is palpated, and the first end of
the wire is passed along the lingual aspect of the mandible and enters the mouth in the lingual vestibule adjacent to the mandible. Care must be taken to pass the
wire along the lingual surface of the mandible; if the wire
is passed too far medially, it may injure various structures, such as Warthin’s duct. The other end of the wire
is passed through the same extraoral puncture site in the
skin inferior to the border of the mandible. This end of
the wire is passed buccally and enters the mouth in the
depth of the vestibule just adjacent to the buccal surface
of the mandible. Each wire end is grabbed individually,
and the wire is sawed back and forth until the inferior aspect of the looped wire passes through the soft tissue and
lies firmly against the inferior aspect of the mandible. The
pediatric mandibular cortex is thin, and aggressive sawing
action can result in pulling the wire through the mandible, resulting in a new fracture. Piriform and buttress
wires are inserted via an incision made over the respective
site, creating a hole through which a wire can pass with
a bur. The practitioner must be cognizant of where the
developing tooth buds are.
This discussion focuses on the management of the
mandibular fracture in the pediatric patient with mixed
dentition. Patients with permanent dentition have less
capacity for the bone to adapt and remodel.

SUMMARY
This chapter outlines basic principles used in the management of basic oral and maxillofacial surgical procedures.
Many of the principles discussed can be used in various
aspects of dental practice.

REFERENCES
1.	Litman RS et al.: Breathing patterns and levels of consciousness in children during administration of nitrous oxide
after oral midazolam premedication, J Oral Maxillofac Surg
55:1372–1377, 1995.
2.	Tyagi P et al.: Sedative effects of oral midazolam, intravenous midazolam and oral diazepam in the dental treatment
of children, J Clin Pediatr Dent 37(3):301–305, 2013.
3.	Hupp JR: Principles of routine exodontia. In Hupp JR, Ellis
E III, Tucker MR, editors: Contemporary oral and maxillofacial
surgery, ed 6, Philadelphia, 2014, Mosby/Elsevier, pp 88–118.
4.	Ash MM et al.: A study of periodontal hazards of third molars, J Periodontol 33:208, 1962.
5.	Blakey GH et al.: Changes in third molar and non-third molar periodontal pathology over time, J Oral Maxillofac Surg
65:1577–1583, 2007.
6.	Blakey GH et al.: Progression of periodontal disease in the
second/third molar region in subjects with asymptomatic
third molars, J Oral Maxillofac Surg 64:189–193, 2006.
7.	Sidlauskas A, Trakiniene G: Effect of the lower third molars
on the lower dental arch crowding, Stomatologija 8(3):80–84,
2006.
8.	Kugelberg CF et al.: Periodontal healing after impacted lower
third molar surgery in adolescents and adults. A prospective
study, Int J Oral Maxillofac Surg 20:18, 1991.
9.	Chipasco M et al.: Germectomy or delayed removal of mandibular third molars: the relationship between age and incidence of complications, J Oral Maxillofac Surg 53:418–422,
1995.
10.	Pogrel MA: What is the effect of timing of removal on the incidence and severity of complications? J Oral Maxillofac Surg
70(9 Suppl 1):S37–S40, 2012.
11.	Park JH, Srisurapol T, Tai K: Impacted maxillary canines: diagnosis and management, Dent Today 31(9):62, 64–66, 2012.
12.	Jacoby H: The etiology of maxillary canine impaction, Am
J Orthod 84:125–132, 1983.
13.	Kaban LB, Troulis MJ: Dentoalveolar surgery. In Kaban LB,
Troulis MJ, editors: Pediatric oral and maxillofacial surgery,
Philadelphia, 2004, WB Saunders, p 131.
14.	Alqerban A et al.: Pre-surgical treatment planning of maxillary canine impactions using panoramic vs cone beam CT
imaging, Dentomaxillofac Radiol 42(9):20130157, 2013.
15.	Rossini G et al.: Localization of impacted maxillary canines
using cone beam computed tomography. Review of the literature, Ann Stomatol (Roma) 3(1):14–18, 2012.
16.	Kokich VG: Surgical and orthodontic management of impacted maxillary canines, Am J Orthod Dentofac Orthop 126:3,
2004.
17.	Yan B et al.: Maxillary canine impaction increases root resorption risk of adjacent teeth: a problem of physical proximity, Am J Orthod Dentofacial Orthop 142(6):750–757, 2012.
18.	Boynton T, Lieblich SE: Surgical uprighting of second molars, Atlas Oral Maxillofac Surg Clin North Am 21(2):235–237,
2013.
19.	Pogrel MA: The surgical uprighting of mandibular second
molars, Am J Orthod Dentofac Orthop 108:180–183, 1995.
20.	Topazian RG et al.: Oral and maxillofacial infections, ed 4,
Philadelphia, 2002, WB Saunders.
21.	Fonseca RJ et al.: Oral and maxillofacial trauma, ed 4, Philadelphia, 2013, WB Saunders, pp 248–292.

CHAPTER

30

The Child in Context of the
Family, Community, and
Society
s Burton L. Edelstein and Karen M. Yoder

For additional resources, please visit the

website.

CHAPTER OUTLINE
CONCEPTUAL FRAMEWORK FOR
PEDIATRIC ORAL HEALTH
CHILDREN’S ORAL HEALTH AND
DENTAL CARE
Disease Burden and Caries
Consequences

Dental Care Utilization and
Governmental Impacts
THE STRUCTURE OF DENTAL PUBLIC
HEALTH AND ITS ROLE IN
CHILDREN’S ORAL HEALTH

CONCEPTUAL FRAMEWORK FOR
PEDIATRIC ORAL HEALTH
Children are, by nature, dependent. They are significantly
influenced by others in their lives. They live and function
within the larger contexts of their families, communities,
and societies, and their oral health is significantly influenced by each of these layers-of-life. In fact, their oral health
risks and their oral health status are influenced more by the
genes they inherit, the social and cultural environment in
their lives, the physical characteristics of their community,
and most of all the health behaviors they learn and adopt
than by the totality of care provided by dental professionals. Yet the dental professional is the reliable source of
technical information on oral health promotion through
prevention and risk mitigation and the only professional
capable of treating oral and dental pathology.
For the clinician who cares for children, these facts suggest three essential courses of action to promote a child’s
oral health: (1) the dentist must address each child and
family with a keen awareness of the opportunities and
constraints that affect the child’s oral health; (2) the dentist must recognize the provision of dental care as a single
component among multiple factors affecting each child’s
oral health and recognize that what happens day-to-day
outside the dental operatory is most critical; and (3) the
dentist must actively engage as a recognized resource for
oral health information who can influence what happens
on a daily basis. While the dental professional is the oral
health expert, the holistic approach to oral health promotion arising out of these actions recognizes that others, including dieticians, social workers, health educators,
and community health workers, have special knowledge
skills and capacities to work with children and families in
ways that complement clinical dental care. These “helping

COMMUNITY ORAL HEALTH
PROGRAMS WITH IMPACT ON
CHILDREN’S ORAL HEALTH
CONCLUSIONS

professionals” hold the keys to family-level and community-level interventions that set the stage for salutary
health behaviors. They are more specifically trained to influence health behaviors than are dental professionals. If
the ­central goal of pediatric dental care is sustained positive oral health for all children, then a collaborative approach that targets social and behavioral as well as clinical determinants of oral health is essential.
From a societal perspective, professionals and community leaders of all types assume responsibility not only for
individuals but also for groups and for populations—not
for a single child but for children in general. For example,
dental societies support public education campaigns and
engage with policymakers to support the development and
funding of health programs for children. Individual dental professionals often assume responsibility for groups of
children, for example, volunteering as the oral health consultant to a Head Start Program or engaging with a community health center, housing agency, school, scout group,
special needs program, early intervention program, youth
sports group, or other entity that serves groups of children.
This shift from thinking of individual children as “patients” to thinking about the oral health of all children is
inherent to a shift from “clinical thinking” to ­“population
thinking” or “public health thinking.” Just as clinical dentistry utilizes standard approaches to assessing ­individual
children’s oral health status through complete examination,
providing needed services through clinical care, and ensuring oral health promotion through ongoing preventive care,
so too does population-oriented public health dentistry conduct surveillance to assess population health, attend to the
adequacy and availability of dental care delivery systems to
provide care, and conduct oral health promotion activities
that maximize the totality of a society’s oral health.
645

646

Chapter 30

n

The Child in Context of the Family, Community, and Society

Of particular interest to readers of this volume is that
pediatric dentistry and public health dentistry share common origins. This is because society, most often through
its governmental structures, has long attended to the
needs and interests of vulnerable populations, whether
those populations are made vulnerable by social or physical liabilities or dependencies that result from age or
­special needs. Pioneers in community dentistry who were
motivated by concern for children’s oral health include
photography giant George Eastman, who developed
school-based dental programs at the turn of the twentieth century; Alfred Fones, who founded the dental hygiene profession’s first school in 1913; and the American
Academy of Pediatric Dentistry founders, who created an
organization with a mission that today affirms its commitment to “advocate policies, guidelines and programs
that promote optimal oral health and oral health care
for infants and children through adolescence, including
those with special healthcare needs.”
Just as the range of potential interventions for clinicians is wide, so too is the range of potential interventions for dentists who commit their work to improving
all children’s oral health. At the family level, oral and
general health behaviors and environmental conditions,
including the availability and use of fluoridated water, are
key oral health determinants. At the community level,
the availability of oral and general health educational
programs, school-based and school-linked dental sealant
programs, school nutrition and “junk food” policies, and
even school-based dental care programs exemplify oral
health and dental care determinants that address groups
of children rather than individual children. At the societal level, governmental policies on licensure regulate the
availability of the dental workforce (including dentists,
hygienists, advanced practice dental personnel, and dental therapists), policies on coverage and insurance (e.g.,
in the United States through public insurance programs
such as Medicaid and the Children’s Health Insurance
Program [CHIP] and through private insurance acquired
from employers) and Affordable Care Act Marketplaces
influence the availability of care, health reform that is
moving toward value-based purchasing and outcomesassessed ­
incentives influences health care organization
and financing, and fluoridation policies have an impact
on disease burden. Questions of who can provide what
components of care with what financing under what conditions and to which children are the “mega” systems
questions of public health and public policy that directly
affect the practice of dentistry for children. These questions are consequential to children and to the dental professionals who care for them as they influence the epidemiology of disease, the availability of care, and the options for advancing children’s oral health and dental care.
Conceptually, pediatric dentistry and public health
dentistry share a unique niche within the spectrum of
dental disciplines. They are the only two recognized specialties of dentistry that are essentially holistic in nature.
Unlike other recognized areas of dental specialization that
attend to a particular issue (e.g., periodontics and endodontics), a set of clinical techniques (e.g., orthodontics,
prosthodontics, and oral and maxillofacial surgery), or to

a diagnostic domain (e.g., oral pathology and oral radiology), both pediatric dentistry and public health dentistry
are defined by those they serve—that is, children and entire populations, respectively. For this reason, the required
knowledge and skill sets needed for effective management
of their target population’s oral health are broad.
Care of children requires a working knowledge of all
dental disciplines, with a particular application to patients
who are simultaneously growing and developing. Care of
populations similarly requires a working knowledge of all
core public health disciplines. Epidemiology is the study
of disease prevalence and distribution, correlates across
groups of people, and is analogous to diagnostic modalities in clinical dentistry. Biostatistics is the discipline of
measurement whose theories and techniques are used
for describing, analyzing, and interpreting health data; it
is analogous to skills used to interpret clinical data. Environmental health is the branch of public health that
deals with all aspects of the natural, built, and social environment as it affects human health; it is analogous to
the clinician’s assessment of individual children’s home
conditions that affect oral health behaviors, care-seeking, compliance, and health outcomes. Nutrition is the
study of foods and nutrients and their effect on health;
it plays the same role in population health as it does in
individual health. The public health discipline of health
policy and management deals broadly with the conditions
under which oral health is obtained and care if provided
across populations by dealing with issues as wide ranging
as care-financing, health care workforce, safety-net health
facilities, systems of care, resource allocations, and governmental and professional regulations; it is analogous to
the wide range of issues with which clinical dentists deal
in managing their practices. Just as in dentistry, children
and families have their own unique holistic niche within
public health in the disciplines of maternal and child health
(MCH)—the field that deals with children, including those
with special health care needs, in the context of their parents, families, communities, and societies. As dentistry for
children utilizes all of the clinical disciplines, so too does
MCH utilize all of the disciplines of public health to focus attention on children’s health. The essential need for
both pediatric dentistry and MCH was well stated by child
health leader Grace Abbott in the 1930s when she asserted
that “children are not pocket editions of adults” but need
to be attended to with special consideration of their vulnerabilities and served through an approach that is “not
merely an adaptation of the program for adults.”
With this perspective, it is clear that public health dentistry is of direct relevance to the daily practice of dental
care for children. This chapter describes many of the opportunities, options, resources, and possibilities available
to the dental professions to assess, improve, promote, and
manage the oral health of our children.
A quote attributed to the classical Roman poet Virgil—“As the twig is bent, the tree inclines”—provides a
paradigm for public health’s concern for children and
their oral health. After following a cohort of 980 people
from birth to the age of 26 years, researchers noted that
“adult oral health is predicted by not only childhood
socioeconomic advantage or disadvantage, but also

Chapter 30

by oral health in childhood.”1 Research techniques in
MCH, including “social determinants of health,” “lifecourse studies,” and “common determinants of health
modeling,” all suggest that conditions affecting children play out consequentially throughout life. This is
particularly true of oral health because having childhood caries, particularly early childhood caries (ECC),
is the strongest indicator of lifelong caries risk. This
is because the presence of ECC signifies the presence
of a well-established caries process that remains quite
stable as the primary teeth exfoliate and are replaced
by permanent teeth, and as periodontal diseases cause
recession that exposes root surfaces to caries as children
age into adulthood and senescence. Similarly, genetic,
environmental, behavioral, and even psychological factors strongly affect periodontal health, dental development, occlusion, the occurrence and effects of trauma,
susceptibility to soft-tissue lesions, and every other
aspect of a child’s oral health.

CHILDREN’S ORAL HEALTH AND
DENTAL CARE
While professional dental care is an essential component
of oral health attainment and maintenance, its contribution is relatively modest compared with those of
other oral health determinants. One effort to model the
relative importance of various determinants of general

n

The Child in Context of the Family, Community, and Society

health suggests that only about 10% of health status
can be explained by access to health care. The remaining 90% can be attributed primarily to health behaviors and secondarily to environmental and hereditary
factors.2 Such conceptual modeling has been applied to
children’s oral health status to clarify the relative importance of various oral health determinants. The model
shown in Figure 30-1 lists the “use of dental care” as
only one of six “child-level” factors influencing oral
health along with eight “family-level influences.”3 An
analogous approach to explaining oral health disparities
in children considers four levels of influence: (1) macro
factors as wide ranging as the natural environment and
dental care systems that are available to children; (2)
community factors that include the social/cultural environment and availability of dental services; (3) interpersonal factors involving social stressors, integration, and
support; and (4) individual factors of biology, health
behaviors, care-seeking behaviors, and psychological
considerations.4
Such models help clinicians understand the range of
factors that they can, and cannot, manage or influence
in seeking to help each child and each child’s family
attain and maintain excellent oral health. The technical content of clinical care is entirely within the scope
of the clinical dental practitioner. However, key approaches to children’s dental care, such as anticipatory
guidance, primary prevention through modification

Time

Dental
care system
characteristics

Social
environment

Environment

Community-level Influences

Family-level Influences

Family
composition

Socioeconomic
status

Child-level Influences
Use of dental care
Biological and
Social
Oral health
genetic
support
endowment
Microflora
Physical and
Physical safety
Physical safety
demographic
Host
Substrate
attributes
Health status
and teeth
(diet)
Physical
of parents
Health behaviors
environment
and practices
Family function
Development
Community
Dental insurance
Culture
oral health
environment
Health behaviors, practices, and coping skills of family
Health care
system
characteristics

647

Social capital
Culture

Figure 30-1 The promotion of children’s oral health through family, community, and society-wide population-level

­interventions, including governmental interventions. (Reproduced with permission from Pediatrics 120:510-520, 2007.)

648

Chapter 30

n

The Child in Context of the Family, Community, and Society

of health behaviors, disease suppression through individually tailored disease management protocols, and
encouraging compliance with professional recommendations, move the clinician away from the biological
sciences and their technical correlates and into the
realms of social and behavioral sciences and their roles
in health education and health promotion. These “soft
science” disciplines have equal relevance for the oral
health of individuals and populations. The dentist who
seeks to improve children’s oral health must therefore
rely equally on clinical and public health interventions
that are based on both hard and soft science.

disruptions result in lost productivity and performance
and take a societal toll that is of concern to public policymakers. More severe impairment from ECC further disrupts normal childhood functions, whereas the natural
sequelae of cavities, including localized and generalized
infections, ­
constitute acute illness requiring intensive
pharmacologic and surgical management. Such infections occasionally extend to adjacent and distant vital
structures, leading to critical impairment, avoidable uses
of the emergency room, hospitalization, and occasional
death both from disease itself and from failed sedative
management.

DISEASE BURDEN AND CARIES CONSEQUENCES

DENTAL CARE UTILIZATION AND
GOVERNMENTAL IMPACTS

The term disease burden implies the volume and distribution of disease within a population and its consequences
in terms of morbidity and mortality. Dental caries remains highly prevalent worldwide. In the United States
and other countries, it is the most prevalent chronic illness in childhood. It is disproportionately a disease of
poverty, minority, and social disadvantage. In the United
States, for example, the Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention (CDC) reports profound disparities in both
oral health status and dental care by income,5 which correlates with age, income, race, and parental education.6
In 2002 the U.S. Surgeon General’s Report, Oral Health in
America, predicted that epidemiologic and demographic
trends would drive childhood caries experience higher
and would lead to additional stress on the dental delivery
system that attends to poor and low-income children.7
Since that time, disease burden and inequities in its distribution have indeed increased among young children.
More U.S. children were born each year since 2007 than
at the peak of the baby boom, with further growth among
minority, poor, and single-parent families, whose children also experience higher caries rates and lower treatment rates. While caries experience among older children
has declined, caries experience among 2- to 5-year-olds
is at a record level of 28%, suggesting additional future
stress on dental care capacity. Possible explanations for
the reported increasing disease burden among young
children include greater access to care that skews epidemiologic surveys and nonclinical factors including demographic changes, lesser availability of fluoride exposure
because of increased use of nonfluoridated bottled water,
changes in parenting styles and practices, and temporary
changes in dietary ­practices.
Not only is childhood caries the most common chronic disease of U.S. children,8 but also it is consequential
at many levels—from mild dysfunction to death. A morbidity/mortality pyramid constructed for ECC and its
consequences includes a wide base representing the high
prevalence of dysfunctions related to intermittent pain
and infection. These include difficulties children encounter in daily functions of eating, sleeping, and attending to
learning. With greater distraction from more intense dental pain, additional disruptions such as lost school time
occur along with family-level disruptions in lost work
as parents seek care for their affected child and increases in family stress resulting from the child’s complaints
and dysfunctions. In the aggregate, these family-level

Dental service rates continue to be highest for children
from higher-income families who enjoy higher levels of
private dental insurance and ready availability of dental
care. Children from poor and low-income U.S. families
are insured under publicly funded programs (Medicaid
and CHIP) that are not as widely accepted by private dentists as are commercial plans, but are widely accepted by
“safety net” providers such as health centers, dental training programs, hospital dental services, and Medicaid-specific private pediatric dental management networks.9 As
a reflection of expanding dental coverage,10 utilization
of dental services by children, including poor and lowincome children, has increased steadily since 2000 even
as utilization by adults has steadily declined.11
Because government provides dental coverage
through Medicaid and CHIP to roughly half of U.S. children at some time during the year, it maintains a strong
interest in efficient and cost-effective pediatric dental
care. In an effort to enhance the cost-effectiveness of
U.S. health care, the federal Centers for Medicare and
Medicaid Services seeks to achieve the triple aim of (1) improved population health outcomes, (2) lower cost, and
(3) positive patient experience. Applied to pediatric oral
health, this orientation supports expanded attention to
prevention and disease control through medical management rather than surgical repair. Fundamental to this
triple aim endeavor are the development and implementation of value-based rather than volume-based payment
mechanisms. Such payment mechanisms are promoting
novel reorganization of health care delivery in medicine
that is anticipated to extend to dental care.12
Envisioned is a future U.S. oral health care delivery system in which “everyone has the ability to be free from
active oral disease and to maintain good oral health.”13
In moving toward this vision, numerous changes in oral
health care delivery and financing are anticipated that include the following: greater use of quality improvement
and outcomes-based accountability measures to demonstrate value as measured by health outcomes per unit
cost; expanded integration of dental care with medical,
educational, and social service personnel and systems;
and an increased emphasis on prevention and disease
management targeted to subpopulations that experience
higher rates of oral diseases, such as children from poor
and low-income families. The death in 2007 of one such
child, 12-year-old Deamonte Driver, near Washington,

Chapter 30

DC, garnered national attention and led to extensive
Congressional investigations of the oral health and dental care of socially disadvantaged children. Greater policymaker attention to public health strategies for improving
children’s oral health ­
included ­
attention to insurance
coverage for dental services, workforce competency and
capacity, safety-net adequacy, and promotion of dental
prevention through community water fluoridation (CWF)
and school-based sealant programs and through proposed
public education campaigns. These federal efforts are mirrored in a host of state oral health planning efforts that
are evidenced in the oral health plans that have been developed by most states.14 These plans, like all governmental efforts, focus mainly on children and other vulnerable
populations. Common public health interventions called
for by these plans include all those mentioned above.
Congressional interests as well call for greater surveillance, engagement of nondental health professionals in
promoting early care for children’s oral health, building
partnerships and coalitions with others concerned with
child health and welfare, developing case management
and disease management systems in communities, and
reducing tobacco initiation and prevalence.15 Many of
these proposed public-level interventions mirror American Academy of Pediatric Dentistry policies that call for
engagement of medical practitioners in oral health promotion, early establishment of dental care in a “dental
home,” and maximal use of anticipatory guidance based
on risk assessment.16 Similarly, the Federal Maternal and
Child Health Bureau, CDC, the National Institutes of
Health, Head Start, the United States Department of Agriculture Food and Nutrition Service, the Department of
Defense, and other federal agencies have long promoted
population-level interventions that hold promise to improve children’s oral health.

THE STRUCTURE OF DENTAL PUBLIC
HEALTH AND ITS ROLE IN CHILDREN’S
ORAL HEALTH
The public health infrastructure consists of the agencies,
institutions, and people who are charged with the assessment of the status of conditions related to oral health,
policy development to ensure science-based prioritization
of resources, and the assurance of adequate systems for
the provision of essential public health services. A wide
range of entities, both governmental and nongovernmental, comprises the public health system, including
educational institutions, local, state, territorial, and tribal
health departments, federal departments and agencies,
hospitals, health centers, laboratories, other health care
providers, and dedicated voluntary organizations. Funding for public health comes from discretionary funding
by government at all levels, grants from foundations, reimbursement from insurance companies, and a variety of
patient and regulatory fees.8
At the federal level in the United States, the Department
of Health and Human Services’ oral health ­endeavors seek
to improve the nation’s oral health through coordinated activities across its many agencies. Among these activities relevant to children’s oral health are Head Start’s

n

The Child in Context of the Family, Community, and Society

649

involvement in securing dental providers for young children, the National Institutes of Health’s research support
for ECC control through pharmacological and behavioral
­interventions, the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services’ promotion of dental access through coverage, the
Health Resources and Services Administration’s support
for training dentists, funding health centers, and supporting MCH program, the Indian Health Service’s effort to
prevent ECC through interdisciplinary programs, CDC
support for state-level oral health programs and fluoridation surveillance programs, and the Office of Minority
Health’s promotion of cultural competency in oral health
training.
The foundation for current public health roles was delineated by the Institute of Medicine in its landmark 1988
publication, The Future of Public Health, which identified
public health’s core functions as assessment, policy development, and assurance.17 Assessment activities include
surveillance of disease, health care structures, and health
care capacities, as exemplified by the CDC’s state-based
Oral Health Surveillance System that monitors the population burden of oral disease, utilization of the oral health
care delivery systems, and status of community water
fluoridation. Policy development leverages public and
legislative, regulatory, and programmatic capacities to improve the public’s health, as exemplified by Congress’ expansion of dental coverage for children and the American
Academy of Pediatric Dentistry’s promulgation of clinical policies and guidelines for care of children. Assurance
programs focus on the capacity needed to address those
needs discovered through assessment and to implement
standards promulgated through policy development. Examples include programs to enhance competencies and
capacities of the dental workforce and delivery systems.
A second Institute of Medicine report, The Future of Public
Health in the 21st Century, expands on these roles by identifying six activities inherent in public health practice that
can be applied to advancing the oral health of children:
policy making, financing, public health protection, collecting and disseminating information about health and
health care delivery systems, capacity building for population health, and direct management of services.18
Dental Public Health, one of nine recognized dental
specialties, and its certification body, the American Board
of Dental Public Health, define dental public health as,
“the science and art of preventing and controlling dental
disease and promoting dental health through organized
community efforts. It is that form of dental practice that
serves the community as the patient rather than the individual. It is concerned with the dental education of the
public, with applied dental research, and with the administration of group dental care programs as well as with the
prevention and control of dental disease on a community
basis.” Board certification requires ten specified competencies beyond clinical dentistry needed to develop and
administer programs that ensure the oral health of children and adults19 (Box 30-1).
Dental public health personnel and programs have
been guided since 1979 by Healthy People National
Health objectives, with the goals of increasing quality and
years of healthy life and eliminating health ­disparities.

650

Chapter 30

n

The Child in Context of the Family, Community, and Society

Box 30-1
Dental Public Health Competencies
Dental public health professionals must be competent in
the following skills:
•	Plan oral health programs for populations
•	
Select interventions and strategies for the prevention
and control of oral diseases and promotion of oral health
•	
Implement, manage, and develop resources for oral
health programs for populations
•	Incorporate ethical standards into oral health programs
and activities
•	Evaluate and monitor dental care delivery systems
•	Design and understand the use of surveillance systems
to monitor oral health
•	Advocate for, implement, and evaluate public health
policy legislation and regulations to protect and promote the public’s oral health
•	Critique and synthesize scientific literature
•	Design and conduct population-based studies to answer oral and public health questions
(Adapted from Dental Public Health Competencies. Journal of
Public Health Dentistry, [1998] 58: 121–122. doi: 10.1111/j.17527325.1998.tb02541.x)

Box 30-2
Healthy People 2020: Oral Health Objectives
Targeting Children
OH-1 Reduce the proportion of children who have dental
caries experience in their primary or permanent teeth
OH-2 Reduce the proportion of children and adolescents
with untreated dental decay
OH-7 Increase the proportion of children, adolescents,
and adults who used the oral health care system in the
past year
OH-9 Increase the proportion of school-based health centers with an oral health component
OH-12 Increase the proportion of children and adolescents
who have received dental sealants on their molar teeth
OH-13 Increase the proportion of the U.S. population
served by community water systems with optimally
fluoridated water
OH-15 (Developmental) Increase the number of States
and the District of Columbia that have a system for recording infants and children with cleft lips and cleft palates to craniofacial anomaly rehabilitative teams
Source: Healthy People 2020 website www.healthypeople.gov/2020/
topicsobjectives2020 (accessed 25th Feb, 2014).

The objectives, which include a series of measures to
guide oral health and dental care, are specific, sciencebased, measurable, time-defined, attainable, and relevant
to the populations’ health and well-being. They are reassessed and redefined every 10 years based on scientific
advances and environmental changes20 (Box 30-2).

COMMUNITY ORAL HEALTH PROGRAMS
WITH IMPACT ON CHILDREN’S ORAL
HEALTH
Healthy People Oral Health objectives have helped shape
innovative programs aimed at improving access to care
and the overall oral health of children. Among the most
effective population-level interventions and programs
relevant to children’s oral health are community water
fluoridation, school-affiliated sealant programs, and application of fluoride varnish by pediatricians, family physicians, and pediatric nurse practitioners.
Although there is some naturally occurring fluoride in
the United States, adjusting the fluoride concentration
to the optimal level for caries prevention is a highly effective method of preventing and controlling dental caries. Community water fluoridation began in 1942 and by
2012 reached 74.6% of the U.S. population being served
by public water systems (over 210 million residents) and
approaching the Healthy People 2020 objectives of 79.6%.
To overcome challenges facing fluoridation, public health
professionals and oral health advocates will need to enhance their promotion of fluoridation and build community-based partnerships to advocate at the local and state
levels for necessary equipment, personnel training, and
maintenance.
School-based and school-linked sealant programs
address the most common permanent tooth caries
­occurrence in children by applying dental sealants to the
occlusal surfaces of permanent molars. School-based services are delivered on-site at schools using portable equipment or a self-contained mobile dental clinic, whereas
school-linked programs are affiliated with nearby public
or private dental office sites. Most sealant programs are
publicly funded and target populations of low-income
children with limited access to comprehensive dental
care. The utility of sealants as a public health measure
is substantiated by their effectiveness in both preventing
cavities and arresting caries progression in noncavitated
teeth21 and their appropriateness for school-affiliated
delivery. For this reason, the percentage of third-grade
children with a dental sealant on a permanent molar has
been a key annually reported state-level oral health measure adopted by both the Maternal and Child Health Bureau and the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services.
Almost all state Medicaid and CHIP programs train and
finance pediatric primary care medical providers to counsel families about caries prevention in the form of fluoride
varnish applied to the primary teeth of young enrolled children and refer children to a dentist for ongoing oral health
supervision.22 These and other programs and services that
advance the oral health of child populations were initiated
by individuals joining together to make a difference. The
adage “it takes a village to raise a child” could be rephrased
to “it takes a coalition to promote oral health.” Effective
pediatric oral health coalitions involve many players, including health and healing professionals, child and health
­advocates, community organizations that serve children’s
and families’ interests, policymakers of various types, and
health care organizations. One growing manifestation
of interprofessional collaboration around pediatric oral

Chapter 30

health, both in the United States and internationally, is the
movement promoting interprofessional education, which
promotes collegiality, cooperation, and familiarity with the
strengths that each profession can offer to the health care
of individuals and communities. In affluent countries, sufficient resources exist to enable each profession to have its
own curriculum, faculty, and licensing bodies, thus separating and polarizing the various professions. In the United
States, the Institute of Medicine’s report, Improving Access to
Oral Health Care for Vulnerable and Underserved Populations,
recommends developing a core set of oral health competencies for nondental health care professionals, integrating
these competencies into accreditation requirements, and requiring graduates to demonstrate oral health competency.23
Similarly, the Federal Health Resources and Services Administration promotes integration of oral health within primary medical care practice and has specified associated core
clinical competencies.24 The Society of Teachers of Family
Medicine has developed the national “Smiles for Life” interdisciplinary oral health curriculum that is endorsed by sixteen professional societies. Specific to children, the Bright
Futures consortium has developed a series of guidelines for
use by all health care practitioners who treat children to
promote children’s oral health and dental care.25
Developing coalitions for action requires a skill set not
typically taught in health professions schools. Recognizing this, Community Campus Partnerships for Health
(CCPH), founded in 1997, builds coalitions between academic institutions and community agencies to promote
health equity and social justice.26 CCPH’s collaborative
intervention model is comprised of four components:
guiding principles of partnership, quality processes,
meaningful outcomes, and transformative experiences.
Guiding principles of partnership that are useful in a variety
of coalition settings are as follows:
  
1.	The partnership forms to serve a specific purpose
and may take on new goals over time.
2.	The partnership agrees upon mission, values,
goals, measurable outcomes, and processes for
­accountability.
3.	The relationship among partners in the partnership
is characterized by mutual trust, respect, genuineness, and commitment.
4.	The partnership builds upon identified strengths
and assets but also works to address needs and increase capacity of all partners.
5.	The partnership balances power among partners and
enables resources among partners to be shared.
6.	Partners make clear and open communication an
ongoing priority in the partnership by striving to
understand each other’s needs and self-interests, and
by developing a common language.
7.	Principles and processes for the partnership are
established with the input and agreement of all
partners, especially for decision making and conflict
resolution.
8.	There is feedback among all stakeholders in the partnership, with the goal of continuously improving
the partnership and its outcomes.
9.	Partners share the benefits of the partnership’s accomplishments.

n

The Child in Context of the Family, Community, and Society

651

10.	Partnerships can dissolve, and when they do, they
need to plan a process for closure.
11.	Partnerships consider the nature of the environment within which they exist as a principle of their
design, evaluation, and sustainability.
12.	The partnership values multiple kinds of knowledge
  and life experiences.
CCPH describes “quality processes” as honest, respectful, and ethical commitments to mutual goals and shared
credit. “Meaningful outcomes” refers to valid goals that
hold promise to improve the public’s health, and “transformative experiences” includes heightened political
consciousness regarding the problem needing attention,
evolving policies to address and resolve the problem,
community capacity building, and generating knowledge. Taken together, these principled activities seek to
enhance social justice and improve community health.

CONCLUSIONS
Public health and pediatric dentistry share common
concerns, goals, and interventions. Both recognize that
children’s oral health must be promoted and ensured
through policies and programs that affect children within
the contexts of their families, communities, and society.
Effective collaborations between clinicians who care for
the individual children and public health authorities who
care for populations of children are essential if the oral
disease burden among children is to be reduced and children’s health and welfare are to be assured. A Workshop
on Children and Oral Health, sponsored by the U.S. Surgeon General, developed a set of recommendations for
improving children’s oral health.27 Distilled from expert
perspectives offered by many different disciplines, they
are as follows:
  
1.	Start early in children’s lives and involve all who
come in contact with young children and their families.
2.	Ensure the availability of the needed competencies of
all who work to improve children’s oral health.
3.	Be accountable for children’s oral health outcomes and
for resources committed to oral health programs to
ensure that efforts are most effective and worthwhile.
4.	Take public action through health education, public
policy formulation, removal of barriers to oral health
and dental care, and enhancement of the social environment to promote oral health.
5.	Maximize the utility of science, both biological and
behavioral science, to ensure efficiency and effectiveness.
6.	Fix public programs when they fail to meet their objectives by ensuring sufficient resources, management,
and accountability.
7.	Grow an adequate workforce of health professionals,
child care workers, nutritionists, behaviorists, and
others who can promote children’s oral health and
well-being.
8.	Empower families and enhance their capabilities and
opportunities to ensure their children’s oral health.
  
These eight approaches (Fig. 30-2) are synergistic and
cross clinical and public health domains. Effective dentistry

652

Chapter 30

1

The Child in Context of the Family, Community, and Society

n

2
Start early and
involve all

3
Assure
competencies

4

Be accountable

5
Take public
action

6

Action Steps

Maximize the
utility of science

Grow an adequate
workforce

8
Empower families
and enhance their
capacities

7
Fix public
programs

Figure 30-2 Healthy People objectives are established every

decade by the U.S. Department of Health and Human
Services to communicate science-based high-priority health
issues. Benchmarks are established to enable monitoring
progress toward goals over time. Oral Health Objectives are
one of the 42 topic areas. (Data from Edelstein BL: Forward
to the background papers from the U.S. Surgeon General’s Workshop on Children and Oral Health. Amb Pediatr
2(2):139-140, 2002.)
for children requires that all concerned with children’s
oral health subscribe to the full array of these recommendations. The resulting improvement in children’s oral
health will secure a future in which oral health disparities
are eradicated, oral health is ensured, and oral function is
guaranteed for all children (see Box 30-1).

REFERENCES
1.	Thomson WM, et al.: Socioeconomic inequalities in oral
health in childhood and adulthood in a birth cohort, Community Dent Oral Epidemiol 32:345–353, 2004.
2.	McGinnnis JM, Williams-Russo P, Knickman JR: The case for
more active policy attention to health promotion, Health Affairs 21(2):78, 2002.
3.	Fisher-Owens SA, et al.: Influences on children’s oral health:
a conceptual model, Pediatrics 120:e510–e520, 2007.
4.	Patrick DL, et al.: Reducing oral health disparities: a focus on
social and cultural determinants, BMC Oral Health 6(Suppl
1):S4–S21, 2006.
5.	Dye BA, Li X, Thorton-Evans G: Oral health disparities as
determined by selected healthy people 2020 oral health objectives for the United States, 2009-2010, NCHS Data Brief
104:1–8, 2012.
6.	Edelstein BL, Chinn CH: Update on disparities in oral health
and access to dental care for America’s children, Acad Pediatr
9:415–419, 2009.
7.	Oral Health in America: Report of the U.S. Surgeon General, 2002.
8.	Casamassimo PS, et al.: Beyond the dmft: the human and
economic costs of early childhood caries, J Am Dent Assoc
140:650–657, 2009.
9.	Edelstein B: Dental visits for Medicaid children: analysis and
policy recommendations, Children’s Dental Health Project,
June 2012.

10.	Mandal M, et al.: Changes in state policies related to oral
health in the United States, 2002-2009, J Public Health Dent
74(4):266–275, 2014.
11.	Vujicic M, Nasseh K: A decade in dental care utilization
among adults and children (2001-2010), Health Serv Res
49:460–480, 2014.
12.	Edelstein BL: The roles of federal legislation and evolving
health care systems in promoting medical-dental collaboration, J Calif Dent Assoc 42(1):19–23, 2014.
13.	National Oral Health Quality Improvement Committee: Vision for the US Oral Health System for 2023. Dentaquest Institute, undated. Available at http://www.dentaquestinstitute.
org/sites/default/files/DQI_QI_OralHealthSystemVision
Statement.pdf
14.	Children’s Dental Health Project: State Oral Health Plan Comparison Tool, Washington, DC, 2014, Children’s Dental Health
Project. Available at https://www.cdhp.org/resources/307
-state-oral-health-plan-comparison-tool.
15.	Edelstein BL: Federal supports for state oral health plans,
J Public Health Dent 72:S54–S59, 2012.
16.	American Academy of Pediatric Dentistry: 2013-14 Definitions, Oral Health Policies, and Clinical Guidelines. Available at http://www.aapd.org/policies/.
17.	
Institute of Medicine (IOM): The future of public health,
Washington, DC, The National Academy of Sciences.
18.	Institute of Medicine (IOM): The future of public health in the
21st century, Washington, DC, 2002, The National Academy
of Sciences.
19.	American Dental Association, Commission on Dental Accreditation and Licensure: Definitions of recognized dental
specialties, http://www.ada.org/495.aspx. Accessed 25Feb14.
20.	
Healthy People National Health Objectives: http://www
.healthypeoplegov/hp2020.
21.	Beauchamp J, et al.: Evidence-based clinical recommendations for the use of pit and fissure sealants: a report of the
American Dental Association Council on Scientific Affairs,
J Am Dent Assoc 139(3):257–268, 2008.
22.	American Academy of Pediatrics: State medicaid payment for
caries prevention by non-dental professionals, June 2013. http://
www@aap.org/oralhealth/docs/OHReimbursementChart.
pdf.
23.	
IOM (Institute of Medicine) and NRC (National Research
Council): Improving access to oral health care for vulnerable and
underserved populations, Washington, DC, 2011, The National
Academies Press.
24.	Health Resources and Services Administration: Integration of
oral health and primary care practice, US Department of Health
and Human Services, February 2014. http://www.hrsa.gov/
publichealth/clinical/oralhealth/rimarycare/integration
oforalhealth.pdf.
25.	Casamassimo P, Holt K, editors: Bright futures in practice:
pocket guide, Washington, DC, 2004, National Maternal and
Child Oral Health Resource Center.
26.	
CCPH Board of Directors: Position statement on authentic
partnerships. Community-Campus Partnerships for Health,
2013.
27.	https://www.nidcr.nih.gov/DataStatistics/SurgeonGeneral/
Conference/ConferenceChildrenOralHealth.

CHAPTER

31

Practice Management
s Julie Weir

For additional resources, please visit the

website.

CHAPTER OUTLINE
THE FIVE PARTS OF A SUCCESSFUL
DENTAL PRACTICE
DOCTOR’S VISION FOR THE
PRACTICE
MISSION STATEMENTS: PRACTICE
AND TEAM
FISCAL MANAGEMENT
Business Plan
Monitor Goal Numbers
Monitoring Schedule
Setting a Budget

I

Reports That Should be Monitored
Regularly
Fees
Accounts Payable
Retirement Planning
TEAM DYNAMICS
Doctor Leadership
Employee Management
SYSTEMS
New-Patient Appointment
Effective Scheduling

t is important that practitioners have a thorough understanding of what it takes to operate a successful
private pediatric dental practice. In addition to excellent clinical dentistry and behavior management skills,
strong leadership, business, and practice management
knowledge are also necessary. Now more than ever, a dental practice must run like a business because of decreasing
profit margins due to increased competition and lower
managed care reimbursement.
An owner-doctor should feel confident in handling the
following
challenges:
  
•	Be able to handle multiple business issues while also
spending most of the business hours “on the line”
making the product. A dentist must also be the Chief
Executive Officer (CEO), Chief Financial Officer
(CFO), Chief Operating Officer (COO), Chief Information Officer (CIO), and run the Human Resources
department.
•	Engage, motivate, and lead the staff to buy into the
doctor’s vision and help the doctor create the type of
practice he/she desires.
•	Create loyal relationships with parents and children
so they stay in the practice long-term and accept and
complete the treatment plans that are presented.
•	Successfully go out into the community and meet
other health care providers, creating loyal referring
relationships.
•	Address poor job performance issues in a timely manner directly with the staff member to keep practice
systems running efficiently and smoothly.
•	Make tough decisions that are for the greater good of
the team and practice but may not be popular with all
staff members.
  

Surgical Referrals
Managing Collections
Managing Insurance
Treatment Tracking
Internal and External Marketing
Dental Office Technology
Compliance
Clinical Organization
Inventory Control

Limited leadership and business skills are taught in dental school and the average dental student is unable to assimilate this information without hands-on application,
which is not usually available in school. Therefore the dental practitioner must acquire these skills through books,
continuing education programs, trade journals, newsletters, and good advisors: accounting, legal, marketing,
and practice management. The wise doctor who desires
financial success will start educating him/herself about
leadership, business principles, and practice management
systems early on and surround him/herself with experts
who can help shorten the learning curve and increase
profits more quickly. It is beyond the scope of this chapter
to give detailed steps for each practice management area;
however, it aims to create an awareness of what should be
in place in a practice to establish a framework for success.

THE FIVE PARTS OF A SUCCESSFUL
DENTAL PRACTICE
It can be overwhelming to understand what must be in
place to create a successful practice. Think of it as building a structure with the doctor as the architect. First, the
architect has to create a set of plans, so others will know
what the structure will look like and how to build it. The
doctor’s Vision and the practice’s Mission Statements are
the “plan” for the practice.
All structures need to be built on a strong foundation.
The foundation of a dental practice rests on three strong pillars: fiscal management, team dynamics, and systems. If a
doctor successfully builds these five practice parts and consistently works to keep them strong, the practice will take
form and be prosperous (Fig. 31-1). Jim Collins, in his book
653

654

Chapter 31

n

Practice Management

BUILDING THE SUCCESSFUL PRACTICE

Fiscal
Management
Business Plan

Team Dynamics
Doctor Leadership

Systems
Effective Scheduling
Managing Collections

Monitor Goal Numbers

Employee
Management

Setting a Budget

Job Descriptions

Treatment Tracking

Fees

Communication

New-Patient
Experience

Accounts Payable

Verbal Skills

Marketing

Managing Insurance

Retirement Plan

Technology
Compliance
Forms
Clinical Organization
Inventory Control

Figure 31-1 Building a successful dental practice: the

five parts that go together. (©Julie Weir & Associates
Management Consulting.)

Good to Great, wrote, “The real path to greatness, it turns out,
requires simplicity and diligence. It requires clarity, not instant illumination. It demands each of us to focus on what is
vital—and to eliminate all of the extraneous distractions.”1

The two Mission Statements express what the team is
working to achieve and serve as leadership accountability
tools. Each mission statement sets the standard of performance for team members.

PART 1: DOCTOR’S VISION FOR THE
PRACTICE

PART 3: FISCAL MANAGEMENT

A doctor should define what is in his/her head and heart
about the practice to be created and then share that vision
with team members. A vision cannot be realized until it
is shared. When all team members are working toward a
common vision and goal, the probability of success greatly
increases. The team’s energy becomes synergistic.

PART 2: MISSION STATEMENTS:
PRACTICE AND TEAM
Each day, team members serve two customers: the parent/
patient and each other, including the doctor. Therefore
it is necessary for the team to create two Mission Statements, one for each customer they serve:
  
1.	Patient Mission Statement (for serving patients)
2.	Team Mission Statement (for serving each other)
  

Fiscal management concerns the way in which the finances of a business are managed and includes goal setting, accounts receivable (money owed to the practice),
accounts payable (money owed by the practice), budgeting, fee structure, and monitoring methods.

BUSINESS PLAN
A doctor should have a strong understanding of the business numbers in his/her practice. Every practice should
have an Annual Business Plan with goals that meet the
practice’s and doctor’s financial needs. Monitoring these
goals on a daily and monthly basis will show if any goal
number is not being met. This indicates exactly where
a doctor and team need to focus their actions for the
practice to be financially successful. These goal numbers should also be used as a benchmark of performance
and accountability for the employee who is in charge of

Chapter 31

the system that produces the numbers. Calculating the
practice break-even point, goals, and budget can be outsourced if desired.
A Business Plan should identify the following numbers:
  
•	Break-Even Point (BEP) = total dollars needed to
meet overhead expenses, capital improvements, new
equipment, raises, inflation adjustment, loan payments, doctor salary, and retirement contributions.
Typically, practitioners will work with their accountant or practice management consultant to calculate
the BEP.
•	Monthly Collection Goal = BEP total ÷ 12 months
•	Collection Ratio = previous year’s collection ÷
previous year’s production = collection ratio %
•	Monthly Production Goal = monthly collection
goal ÷ practice collection ratio
•	Producer Work Days/Month Goal defines the
average number of “restorative,” “recare,” “hospital,”
and “ortho” work days per month. There can be four
different areas of productivity in pediatric dentistry
(restorative, recare, ortho, and hospital or in-office
general anesthesia [GA]) that should be monitored
separately.
•	Procedures for one “doctor” work day are typically
scheduled in two columns.
•	Procedures for one “recare” work day are scheduled in one column. A good benchmark is that for
every pediatric “doctor” work day, there should
be at least two “recare” work days scheduled (two
columns). At least 13 recare appointments are completed per day in each column.
•	If a doctor who sees patients 4 days per week × 4
weeks per month (i.e., 16 doctor days per month)
schedules two columns of recare every day, then
there would be 32 recare work days per month. If
a doctor does orthodontics, hospital, and/or GA
dentistry, then the average number of orthodontic,
hospital, and/or GA work days per month should
also be determined.
•	Daily Production Goals for Each Producer =
the amount of production that the doctor should
complete each day in restorative work and the
amount of production that the hygienist/coronal
polishing assistant should complete in each recare
column.
•	The daily production by each producer can be
monitored separately by the use of different producer codes.
•	The producer’s (doctor, recare, orthodontics, hospital, and/or GA) work days per month multiplied
by the producer’s daily production goal must equal
the Monthly Production Goal.
•	Practice recare should continue to grow until it
becomes 50% to 75% of the total practice production, depending upon the decay level of the
patient population.
•	All procedures performed on the recare patient or
in the recare chairs should be included in the recare
production total to accurately reflect the level of
productivity generated from recare patients: recare

n

Practice Management

655

Box 31-1
Sample Calculations For Setting Practice
Goals
Annual Break-Even Point $1,147,776 ÷ 12 = Monthly Collection Goal $95,648
Previous Year’s Annual Collection $975,000 ÷ Previous
Year’s Annual Production $994,898 = 98% Collection Ratio
Monthly Collection Goal $95,648 ÷ Practice Collection
Ratio 98% = Monthly Production Goal $97,600
Average Restorative Work Days/Month 16 × Daily Restorative Production Goal $2700 = $43,200 Restorative
Monthly Production Goal
Average Recare Work Days/Month 32 × Daily Recare
Production Goal $1550 = $49,600 Recare Monthly Production Goal
Average Hospital Work Days/Month 1 × Daily Hospital
Production Goal $5000 = $5000 Hospital Monthly Production Goal
The three Monthly Producer Production Goals above
should equal the Total Monthly Production Goal $97,600
examination, prophylaxis, radiographs, fluoride
treatments, and sealants.
•	Daily Scheduling Goals for Each Producer =
the producer’s daily production goal ÷ 95%.
  
Example of calculations for practice goals:
  
•	For illustration purposes, the example in Box 31-1
shows calculations for a sample practice that has a
BEP of $1,147,776.
•	Notice that in this example, when the BEP is calculated, the practice’s new desired BEP requires a 17%
increase over the previous year’s total collections.
[($1,147,776 − $975,000) ÷ $975,000 = 17%].
•	At this point the doctor must either take action to
achieve this 17% growth through marketing for
more new patients, if there are unfilled appointments in the schedule, or increase efficiency with
the current schedule, facility, and staff to produce
the 17% increase in collections.
•	If the doctor is unable to meet the 17% increase in
collections, then adjustments must be made to the
practice’s financial needs by decreasing expenses or
income expectations.

MONITOR GOAL NUMBERS
Monitoring practice goal numbers is a system that should
be a part of every practice. The universal law of business is
that people pay attention to what gets measured. The purpose of monitoring is to measure and improve. Some goal
numbers are monitored on a daily basis so that immediate
actions can be taken for improvement. Other numbers are
not as time-sensitive and are reviewed on a monthly basis.
Numerous goal-monitoring tools are available in the marketplace, or a doctor can track goals in an Excel spreadsheet.
Meeting the practice goals month to month can vary depending on the time of the year, so monthly totals should
also be tracked on a year-to-date basis. Goal numbers should

656

Chapter 31

n

Practice Management

be discussed monthly as a team, and if any goal is not met,
the team can decide what they can do differently to help the
practice meet that particular goal number. A team can easily
increase production by 10% when using a goal-monitoring
system because of a better team focus on the end result.

correctly. A dental practice should grow 2% to 4% above
the national inflation rate each year to stay even, and
higher than this to experience true practice growth. The
costs of dental supplies and services can be greater than
those for regular consumer products.

MONITORING SCHEDULE

SETTING A BUDGET

There are various monitoring tools available in the marketplace in addition to dental software reports that a team can
use to monitor important practice numbers and statistics.

There are two ways to increase profitability in any practice: earn more or spend less. Control of expenses (savings) is one of the most underused yet valuable tools to
increase profitability. Unspent dollars can go directly
to the bottom line in the form of profit. The most effective way to save is to control spending through
budgeting.
•	Create an Annual Overhead Budget by taking the
practice BEP amount and multiplying it by the
following expense category percentages. Then,
divide that number by 12 to get the monthly
budget amount for each category. Budgets should
be tracked at the end of each fiscal quarter to see if
expenses are in line and to make adjustments in a
timely manner.
•	Miscellaneous, 4% to 6%: advertising, business
insurance, property taxes, misc.
•	Office, 3%: bank charges, credit card fees, billing
and collections, office supplies, postage, printing
•	Professional development, 1%: dues and subscriptions, staff continuing education
•	Dental supplies: 4% to 6% (if practice has limited
reduced-fee patients), 7% to 10% (if practice has a
high volume of reduced-fee patients)
•	Lab, .25% (will be higher if there is a large volume
of ortho)
•	Facilities, 8% to 10%: rent, repairs, janitorial, laundry, telephone, utilities
•	Professional advisors, 2% to 4%: legal, consulting,
accounting, payroll service
•	Labor, 18% to 24%
•	Staff benefits, 2% to 3%
•	Staff payroll tax, 2%
•	Owner benefits, 1% to 3%: payroll tax, auto,
continuing education, travel, dining, retirement,
insurance
•	Owner income, 30% to 48%
•	Equipment, depreciation, and debt service, 3% to
10%
•	Associate doctor wages, 5% to 10%

Daily
•	Production vs. Goal for each producer
•	Average restorative production per day—$2500 to
$6500 Usual and Customary Rate (UCR) fee, depending on the fee level and the use of expandedfunction assistants
•	Average recare production per column—$1800 to
$2200 UCR fee, depending on the fee level
•	Month-to-date production vs. goal for each producer
and the total practice
•	Show rate of patients: number of patients who appeared for their appointment/number of patients
scheduled
•	Treatment acceptance ratio: case acceptance/case
presentations = 80% to 90%

Monthly
•	Total practice production
•	Total producer production (doctor, recare, hospital,
orthodontics)
•	Average daily producer production
•	Producer work days (doctor, recare, hospital, orthodontics)
•	Total practice collections
•	Collection ratio: 96% to 98% of collectable fees,
depending upon how much charitable dentistry is
performed
•	Show rate of patients: 95% show rate is preferred
•	Accounts receivable total: 1:1 ratio of total accounts
receivable : monthly production
•	Total of accounts receivable in 61+ days: not more
than 18% to 25%
•	Collection at time of service: 35% to 45%
•	Adjustments to production: 2% to 4%
•	Adjustments to collection: insurance/patient refunds
and insufficient funds checks = less than 1%
•	New patients: from 55 to 65+ new patients/month are
needed to maintain and grow an average one-doctor
pediatric dental practice. Count only Current Dental
Terminology (CDT) code # DO150 (Comprehensive
Oral Examination).
•	Percent of patients in recare: goal is 75%

Quarterly
•	Overhead expenses from the Profit and Loss Statement against budget amounts

Yearly
Do a comparative analysis of all goal numbers to see if
there is a decrease or increase and if the practice is growing

REPORTS THAT SHOULD BE MONITORED
REGULARLY
Using the reports in the dental software can help the practice operate more efficiently. Following are some of the
major reports your office manager (OM)/front desk coordinator should be completing and the doctor should be
reviewing.
•	Day Sheet: Printed daily and reviewed to make sure
that all services are included and have been billed
correctly to the insurance company. Practice revenue
is lost when additional procedures completed on the
patient are not communicated to the front desk staff
before the patient checks out.

Chapter 31

•	Daily Deposit Report: Your bank account should
reflect the same amounts on the daily deposit slip.
­Often, with electronic funds transfers, it is hard to
track whether the money that was deposited into
your bank account was entered into patient ­accounts
in your software. Make sure each day that your
bank account deposits match the amounts on your
previous daily deposit slip. That means that all EFT
payments, credit card charges, checks, cash, and
­CareCredit payments need to be entered into the
software the day they are received. The doctor should
go online, log on to the bank account in the morning, and let the staff know what EFT payments arrived
and if the credit card amounts that were settled the
evening before match.
•	Unpaid Claims Report: The Unpaid Claims report
should be completed weekly to ensure that claims are
paid in a timely manner or resubmitted for payment
with corrected information, if necessary. Some offices
lose thousands of dollars each year on claims that
the insurance carrier denied because they were not
submitted within the time limit for payment.
•	Procedures Not Attached to Insurance
Claims: This report will show all procedures that
were never submitted to insurance for payment. This
report should be reviewed at the end of each day.
These procedures should be submitted for payment
immediately.
•	Secondary Insurance Report: Many offices also
lose money by not submitting the secondary claims.
Even if the primary insurance company paid 100%,
you still should submit to the secondary insurance.
In some cases where the primary is a PPO and the secondary is a traditional indemnity, there is a possibility
for additional payment on those services up to your
UCR fees.
•	Unscheduled Treatment Plans, Broken Appointments, and Past Due Recare Reports:
Don’t let your patients get lost! This is untapped
potential revenue to quickly fill your schedule and
create production. These reports should be printed
monthly, and your OM should assign a team member
who will be accountable for working these reports and
tracking the results.
•	New-Patient Referral Report: Review monthly
with the marketing team and decide on appropriate
marketing actions to take place in the next month.

n

Practice Management

657

is better to raise fees gradually year to year to adjust for
inflation and to cover increases in expenditures.
Fee increases should not be announced to patients; an
increase simply becomes effective on a certain date. The
dentist and staff who take pride in the quality of their
care and services will seldom feel defensive about fee increases, and that feeling will be imparted to patients and
parents. Most people are willing to pay for care that they
value and services that exceed the norm. When customer
service expectations are met and exceeded, fees are never
an issue. When expectations fall short, fees are always an
issue. To support a well-deserved fee, excellent customer
service is paramount.
Staff members should be informed why regular fee increases are necessary. With no concept of overhead costs,
the staff may assume that all fee increases go directly into
the dentist’s pocket, which is not true. Explain that the
fee increases are there to keep up with the increasing costs
of supplies, services, and updating equipment.
The following factors must be considered when fees
are
set:
  
•	Professional fees in the area, although collusion with
other dental practices is illegal
•	Level of desired fees for the practice (high, mid-, or
low range) and the type of patient the doctor desires
to treat
•	Cost of operations
•	Profit after debt service
  
Fee increases or fee cuts have significant impact on
practice income and profit, as demonstrated in Figures
31-2, 31-3, and 31-4.

ACCOUNTS PAYABLE
Accounts payable is the total amount of money the practice owes for goods and services received. Bills should be
paid no more frequently than twice a month after statements are checked against invoices.
An invoice is an itemized list of goods received with
each supply shipment, and a statement is a summary of all
invoices for that month. Paying accounts regularly from
statements rather than from invoices can help avoid mistakes, such as paying the same bill twice, and ensure that
the practice maintains an excellent credit rating.
Utilize a well-organized Chart of Accounts in an accounting software program to track expense categories
and an overhead budget.

FEES
Fees should be reviewed annually and, if necessary, raised
at least by the inflation rate to generate an adequate margin of profit. Most patients expect, accept, and may not
even notice small adjustments in fees. Problems arise
when a dentist who is reluctant to increase fees does not
do so for several years and then must implement a significant increase. A hiatus in raising fees while costs of
operations continue to increase means lower profits. If
this pattern is allowed to continue, a practice can have
significant financial difficulties that force a fee increase of
20% to 30% or more in one year. Because most patients
will notice and complain about such a large increase, it

Profit Margin

5% Fee
Increase

10% Fee
Increase

15% Fee
Increase

20% Fee
Increase

20%

25%

50%

75%

100%

25%

20%

40%

60%

80%

30%
35%

16.6%
14.3%

33%
28.6%

50%
42.9%

66.6%
57.2%

40%

12.5%

25%

37.5%

50%

45%

11.1%

22.2%

33.3%

44.4%

50%

10%

20%

30%

40%

Figure 31-2 Increase in net income related to fee increase.

658

Chapter 31

Practice Management

n

Profit Margin

Fee Increase

% Loss of Production

25%
25%
25%
30%
30%
30%
35%
35%
35%
40%
40%
40%

5%
10%
20%
5%
10%
20%
5%
10%
20%
5%
10%
20%

17%
29%
45%
14%
25%
40%
13%
22%
36%
11%
20%
33%

Figure 31-3 Percent loss of production related to fee in-

crease to maintain profitability.

Profit Margin

Fee Cut

25%
25%
25%
30%
30%
30%
35%
35%
35%
40%
40%
40%

10%
20%
30%
10%
20%
30%
10%
20%
30%
10%
20%
30%

% Production Increase
Required

67%
400%
not realistic

50%
200%
not realistic

40%
133%
600%
33%
100%
300%

Figure 31-4 Fee decrease related to increase in production

and practice profits. At whatever point a doctor stops being a
leader by not performing important leadership actions, he/she will
lower his/her profitability potential. Anyone can be a great leader, regardless of personality type, if he/she consistently and
successfully carries out the following leadership actions:
•	Define Practice Vision
•	Provide Strong Fiscal Management
•	Monitor Practice Goals and Budget

Assume the Leadership Role
All teams need a leader or they will not know where to
go or what to do. A doctor can delegate some leadership
responsibilities but cannot abdicate the leadership role.
In the book The Leadership Challenge by Kouzes & Posner,4
leadership is defined as:
•	A process ordinary people use to bring forth the best
from themselves and others
•	A set of distinct practices that leaders exhibit when
they’re doing their best
•	An understandable and a universal process
The authors also go on to say that success depends on
your ability to lead people:
•	To set and communicate a clear direction,
•	To motivate,
•	To provide coaching and feedback so that they will
succeed in their goals
A strong commitment to good leadership is an essential ingredient for practice success.

Constantly Evaluate if Things Can Be Done Better.
Do Not Settle for the Status Quo

to maintain profitability.

Strive to improve efficiency, systems, and staff. There will
always be new and better technology and systems.

RETIREMENT PLANNING

Have Excellent Advisors, Mentors, and a Support
System

The time for a dentist to begin planning retirement is the
day he/she begins to practice because the only financial
benefits he/she can count on in retirement will be what
he/she has saved and Social Security. Monies from a practice sale can be unpredictable depending on the timing of
the sale and the state of the economy.
A financial advisor can help the dentist choose from
among many plans with various tax benefits, such as an
individual retirement account (IRA), a 401K, pension
plan, pension and/or profit-sharing plan, and so on. The
earlier one begins, the greater the accumulation of wealth
at retirement, due in large measure to compound interest.
Compound interest is the concept of adding accumulated
interest to the principal.2 The rule of 72, a simple way of
illustrating the growth potential of compound interest, is
a useful tool for calculating an approximation of the time
needed to retain an investment before it doubles in value.
You can find an example of the rule online.3

PART 4: TEAM DYNAMICS
DOCTOR LEADERSHIP
Many doctors do not understand the power their leadership actions have on their level of stress, job satisfaction,

•	Advisors include an accountant, attorney, banker,
insurance advisor, practice management consultant,
computer/technology expert, and investment counselor/retirement planner.
•	Good mentors are invaluable and usually free. Find
successful professionals who would be willing to share
their knowledge. Create a support system with colleagues with whom you can meet regularly for lunch
or call for advice.
•	The American Dental Association (ADA, www.ada.org)
has a variety of publications pertinent to practice
management issues. Of particular interest is Frequently
Asked Legal Questions, available through ADA Member
Services.5

Lead by Example and Create a Healthy Business
Culture
A doctor is in control of the “business culture” or environment in which he/she and the team will work on a daily
basis. It can be a healthy environment that is fun and productive or a dysfunctional environment that is stressful
and less productive. A doctor’s behavior sets the standard
and defines this culture; therefore he/she must hold him/
herself to high standards and never behave in ways that
would not be tolerated from an employee.

Chapter 31

Healthy Business Culture
•	Open and honest communication; team members
give feedback to each other.
•	Expressing a different opinion is not feared. A discussion between parties can take place and a solution or
compromise can be reached.
•	Employees are not afraid to take risks and try new
things. They are not fearful of severe admonition, but
are comfortable in taking ownership of the mistake
and learning from it.
•	Employees praise and support each other.
•	Gossip is not tolerated.
•	Problem employees are held accountable in a timely
manner to improve their behavior, or they are removed.
•	Problem patients/parents are removed from the
practice.
•	Each state and/or Dental Board has certain laws
that govern the dismissal and/or transfer of a
patient, including charging for radiographs and records. The dentist must weigh the advantages and
disadvantages of his or her actions and responses
in each individual case and seek legal advice if necessary. Everything should be documented, because
any notes written into a patient’s chart could, in
case of a lawsuit, be read aloud in court. A dentist
or staff member should never argue with or belittle
a patient or parent. In addition to concerns regarding the doctor/patient relationship, such actions
can lead to negative public relations, may well
cause the patient to leave the practice, or could
trigger a lawsuit.

Be “People Smart”: Understand People’s Different
Behavioral Traits and Strengths
Managing staff effectively and with low stress is one of
the biggest challenges doctors face.
Being “People Smart” is a powerful leadership tool that
helps a doctor be a better leader, manager, and employer
by understanding:
•	That people possess different mixtures of behavioral
traits and how this affects their job performance
•	A person’s strengths and limitations to be able to hire
and coach correctly
•	Each person’s motivators that will empower him/
her to be more productive and experience greater job
satisfaction.
After extensive research, Professional DynaMetric Programs (PDP), www.pdpglobal.com,6 a worldwide leader in
top-of-the-line behavioral assessment solutions for businesses, has defined the four behavior traits as Dominance
(take charge), Extroversion (people), Pace (patience), and
Conformity (systems). Each trait has high and low behavioral intensities. One of these four high traits will be a
person’s strongest and will dictate 50% to 70% of his/her
natural behavior and responses. It is almost like people
come from four different “planets,” each “planet” with its
own natural way of behaving and communicating.
After learning about the four “planets” and work style
approaches, a doctor has a better insight as to why employees function the way they do.

n

Practice Management

659

High Dominance (Take Charge Trait)
•	Can take charge, likes to accomplish goals, and is
comfortable with risks
•	Communication style is short and to the point, can
often be interpreted as blunt
Low Dominance
•	Does not want to be in charge, looks for strong leadership
•	Agreeable
High Extroversion (People Trait)
•	Outgoing, enthusiastic, motivating, prefers to interact
with people, and makes others feel welcomed and
comfortable
•	Communication style is persuasive and enjoys
talking
Low Extroversion
•	Does not mind working alone
•	Quiet with people he/she does not know
High Pace (Patience Trait)
•	Focuses on work output. Prefers routines and working
on one thing at a time, does not like changes
•	Communication style is warm and friendly and is
careful to avoid confrontation
Low Pace
•	Likes change and fast pace
•	Can easily multi-task
High Conformity (Systems Trait)
•	Prefers structured and standard operating procedures,
concerned with accuracy
•	Communication style is guarded, cautious, and exacting
Low Conformity
•	Can see the big picture and does not need a pre-set
structure in which to work
•	Independent, wants to live by his/her own rules

Work-Style Approaches
There are three ways people approach getting a job done.
Many times doctors do not understand why their employees wait to be told what to do. This can easily be explained
by understanding the three work style approaches. It is wise
to hire a person with a Thrust work style for the leadership
positions in your office.
Thrust
•	An inner drive to push quickly to get the job done
•	Initiates and completes a project or task
Ste-Nacity
•	A coined word of Professional DynaMetric Programs
(PDP), from steadfast and tenacious
•	An inner drive that gets the job done in a steady,
persistent manner
•	Initiates and completes a project or task
Allegiance
•	Looks to an outer-directed source (supervisor) to be
told what needs to be done
•	Supports completing a project or task, rarely initiates

Hold Employees Accountable
Many doctors find it difficult to talk to an employee about
poor job performance issues, such as skill level, attitude,
tardiness, absenteeism, and/or teamwork. Most doctors
either avoid this necessary leadership skill or do it poorly

660

Chapter 31

n

Practice Management

because it feels confrontational, and they simply do not
have a format to follow, thus missing a valuable coaching
opportunity with their employees.
When a doctor does not hold employees accountable
for proper job performance and attitudes, it becomes demoralizing, and the good workers will lose respect for the
doctor. Team morale and productivity drop, and eventually the good workers get frustrated and leave for other
jobs. Eventually, this causes the team to “dumb down”
to the manipulative, low-functioning employees with
bad attitudes and poor work ethics, which makes coming to work each day a nightmare of endless problems.
However, when employees are promptly held accountable for proper job performance, the doctor’s reward will
be an enjoyable, high-functioning team that supports the
practice vision, and everyone looks forward to coming to
work each day.

Motivate with Praise, Appreciation,
and Recognition
•	Encourage employee development and growth. Know
what each employee’s goals and motivators are and
try to create them in the workplace.
•	Make employees feel that they are part of the team
and that they matter and make a positive difference.

•	Give recognition and a praise/strength compliment for
a job well done at least once a week to each employee.

Hold Regular Meetings
Clear and consistent communication is the only tool a
team has to improve how its members work together.
Therefore teams should meet regularly to discuss the status of the practice—what is working, what is not working,
and how they are going to fix it—resulting in increased
productivity and reduced stress.
Meetings should take place in the office and not in a
restaurant over lunch. It is more difficult to discuss confidential practice information (production and collection
status) and/or address staff issues in a public atmosphere.

Types of Meetings to Hold
•	Morning meetings
•	Set the tone and level of productivity for the day.
•	Help the team focus on how to get through the
day’s schedule with reduced stress and increased
production by exchanging important team and patient information relating to the schedule (Fig. 31-5).
•	Monthly team meetings
•	Discuss work patterns between departments and
team members.

MORNING MEETING

• Positive Greeting
• Are Goals Met Today? Report Producer Production
Status Month to Date
• Discuss Game Plan for the Day—CA’s, who will do what
• Where to Mine the Gold?
• ID Best Time for Emergency Patients
• “Engineer” the Schedule for the Next 3 Days
• ID New Patients: chief concern, referral source
• Treatment Diagnosed & Recare Not Scheduled?
• ID Younger siblings that could become lap exams or
scheduled with next recare appt
• ID Ambassador Parents
• Share VIP information
• Financial Arrangements Complete?
• Lab Work Completed?
• Express Appreciation!

Copyright 2012 Julie Weir Dental Practice Management, Ltd JulieWeir.com

Figure 31-5 Morning meeting agenda. (©Julie Weir & Associates Management Consulting.)

Chapter 31

•	Practice monitors are discussed to see if goals are
met and problem-solve what new actions will be
taken if they are not.
•	Educate team members on any new information
pertaining to the practice specifically or pediatric
dentistry generally.
•	Quarterly department meetings
•	There can be up to four departments in a pediatric dental office: front desk, restorative assistants,
recare, and management (if there is an OM and/
or more than one doctor). Each department meets
quarterly with the doctor and OM to discuss and
problem-solve department-specific issues, job duties, and system changes.
•	Monthly marketing meeting
•	To evaluate marketing efforts and decide on new
actions.

Celebrate Success
It is important to recognize the team’s efforts and celebrate
achieving milestones and goals. Celebration a
­ ctivities can
be a dinner or lunch or a surprise shopping afternoon
(doctor gives everyone a cash amount that he/she must
spend on him/herself or return the unspent money at the
end of the afternoon).

EMPLOYEE MANAGEMENT
Personnel Needs
A personable, professional staff is vitally important for
practice success. The dentist must invest time, effort,
and money to hire, train, and retain quality individuals who can be developed into a high-performing team.
A team of committed professionals, working together,
focused on the patients and the practice, can make the
difference between an excellent and a mediocre practice.
Therefore staff development is a sound investment in
any practice.
Before becoming an employer, the dentist must be
aware of state and federal regulations concerning hiring,
employment policies, including Occupational Safety and
Health Administration (OSHA) requirements, employee
records maintenance and retention, employee discipline
and dismissal, and so on. All employment applications,
other forms and tests used in the hiring process, and employment policies described in the office manual should
be reviewed by an attorney who is familiar with state and
federal laws.
Initially, the new practitioner may need to hire only
one or two staff members. If only one individual is hired
at first, a second employee should be added when patient
flow increases to the point where this person can no longer assist at the chair and handle the business desk (e.g.,
collect fees, make appointments, answer the telephone by
the third ring, prepare and mail statements on time, and
pursue broken appointments). When the dentist treats
recare patients more than 8 hours per week, a hygienist or
coronal polishing assistant, depending on the state practice act, should be hired. Many dentists will eventually
make the first person who helped them open their practice their OM. This is not wise, since many times these
people do not exhibit the leadership skills necessary to

n

Practice Management

661

manage a successful dental practice. Be sure that the person you hire to manage your investment is good with
numbers and people.

Office Manual
An Office Manual should be completed before employees
are hired so that there is no confusion about the rules the
employees are expected to follow and the benefits they
will receive. An Office Manual outlines the duties, obligations, and mutual expectations of the employee and
employer and clarifies office policies, employment procedures, benefits, training methods, and office paperwork.
Each employee should read the manual and sign a form
attesting to the fact that he/she has read and agreed to
the policies, to prevent misunderstandings. This document should be placed in the employee’s file. The manual
should be updated as policies and benefits change in the
practice, along with documentation confirming that employees have read the updated version. Prototypes of office manuals are available in electronic versions to assist
in the process and can be customized to the practice and
the state’s labor laws. The attorney for the practice should
review the manual before it is implemented.

Personnel Records
Personnel records are important documents, charting the
history of the employee-employer relationship, just as a
patient’s chart is a documentation of the patient-dentist
relationship. If a problem arises with an employee (e.g.,
a charge of wrongful dismissal in case of termination),
the record will serve as proof that the dentist correctly
discharged employer responsibilities.
Personnel records for all employees should be identical
in appearance, consistently maintained, kept confidential
in locked files, and maintained for the duration of employment plus at least 30 years following an auxiliary’s
departure. Employee medical records (see below) must be
maintained in individual locked files separate from other
personnel records for the duration of employment plus 30
years and include all appropriate forms with pertinent data.
A comprehensive employee record could include the
following:
•	Employee’s name, address, telephone number, and
Social Security number
•	Completed job application, résumé, and interviewing
notes
•	Authorization for a background check and reference
checks
•	Offer of employment
•	Employment tests given as part of the hiring process
•	Date of employment, wage and benefits information
•	Licenses or certifications
•	Federal and state income tax and Employment Eligibility Verification; W-4 and I-9 forms
•	Spouse’s name, employer, and telephone number
•	Person to contact in case of emergency
•	Training records, including dates of training, contents
of the session, and the name and qualifications of
the trainer for OSHA training and cardiopulmonary
resuscitation training
•	Logs of unsafe incidents

662

Chapter 31

n

Practice Management

•	Employee medical records, including injury or exposure to harmful substances, and record of hepatitis inoculation, or signed and dated refusal of the vaccine,
must be maintained in separate locked files
•	Performance appraisal forms and notes from one-onone discussions, signed and dated by the employee
and the dentist; verbal and written requests for performance changes
•	Absentee records
•	CE course records
•	Record of termination, including last date of employment, and the employee’s letter of resignation or
notes from the dismissal conversation if the employee
was fired

Standard Operating Procedures (SOP) Manual
The SOP Manual defines each important task, including
what it is and how to do it, that takes place in the practice
so that the task can be successfully repeated by others. This
becomes a good training tool with new staff or a reference
if a staff member leaves and the task must be completed.

Interviewing, Hiring, and Training

Jim Collins’ quote from Good to Great1 is famous and powerful in its logic: “Get the right people on the bus, the
wrong people off the bus, and the right people in the right
seats.” Successful entrepreneurs find the right people by
following an organized systematic approach for hiring.
Many wrong hires occur because important steps are left
out. Statistics show that it costs a business a minimum of
one and a half times an employee’s annual salary when
an employee has to be replaced. Therefore it is imperative
to do the best job possible when hiring.
Improve your chances of hiring the right person by following these steps:
Create a Job Description
•	Identify the specific job duties and traits/strengths
needed for the job to be performed effectively. Use
behavioral assessment surveys to help put the right
person in the right job by picking the candidate with
the right strengths.
Write an Effective Ad
•	Realize that the best workers may often already be
working for someone else, but they may not be satisfied. Rather than placing the standard ad that is worded
like everyone else’s, write an ad that includes motivators for the type of person you would like to hire.
Have Applicants E-mail Their Résumés to Your
Office
•	Having applicants e-mail their résumés allows you to
prescreen applicants and provides an indication of
their ability to follow directions.
Narrow Your List of Applicants through
­Telephone Interviews to Save Time
•	Applicants can look good on paper, but they can have
poor interpersonal and verbal skills, manners, etc.
•	Review job requirements and the applicants’ skills
and experiences.
•	Discuss their salary and benefits requirements, geographic location, and available work hours to see if
they are compatible.

Interview
•	To maximize efficiency, a well-trained staff member,
preferably your OM, may conduct the initial interview. If the candidate is promising, employment tests,
a tour of the office, an introduction to other staff
members, and a brief conversation with the dentist
should be a part of the first interview.
•	Ask the applicant to complete the following:
•	Employment application
•	Behavioral assessment survey (trait profiling)
•	Release to undergo a background check
•	Release to check references
•	Show him/her a written job description and discuss
the duties.
•	Prepare a list of interviewing questions.
•	These questions should explore the following
traits: initiative, organization, conscientiousness,
effective communication, ability to work well
with others, technical or business training and
experience, and ability to apply previous training
and experience to the job. If questions are skillfully posed, an applicant’s answers will indicate
strengths or weaknesses in these areas.
•	The interviewer should talk less than 25% of
the time. The purpose of the interview is to
­understand the applicant and his or her p
­ otential
for the job. Excessive talking by the i­ nterviewer
limits the time and opportunity that the
­applicant has to tell about personal abilities and
experiences.
•	Do not help the interviewee answer questions. Let
pauses happen. The applicant may be thinking
during the silences, and the interviewer can see
how well and quickly the person responds.
•	Ask open-ended questions. Do not ask questions
that can be answered with “yes” or “no.” If the interviewee begins answering “yes” or “no,” ask him
or her to explain or expand on the answer.
•	Never argue with an applicant. Maintain poise
and remember that you, the interviewer, are in
control.
Hire Based on Behavioral Strengths and Traits,
Not Just Skills. This is one of the most important guidelines when a new employee is hired. You can train a new
employee for specific job skills, but it is very difficult
to change someone’s “personality” if it is not the right
match for the position available.
•	Ask applicants who pass the initial interview to take
a behavioral assessment survey so you can determine
if they have the strengths and traits needed to be
successful in the job. The Professional DynaMetric
Programs has very informative surveys and hiring
tools (www.pdpglobal.com).
Check References
•	Checking references is absolutely essential.
Many people know how to “package” themselves
to cover up past problems. While employers might
be willing to confirm employment dates only,
you can often determine their overall satisfaction
with the employee by their tone of voice and other
comments.

Chapter 31

•	If the applicant has worked in a dental office, be sure
to speak with the doctor. Describe your perceptions
and observations of the applicant to determine if they
are correct. Ask the doctor if there is anything else he/
she would like to share with you. One of the most
effective questions to ask the previous employer is:
“If you had a position open up in your office, would
you rehire this person?” This almost always provides
a strong indication of the employer’s level of satisfaction with the employee.
•	Always have signed permission to call references.
Never call an applicant’s current employer unless he/
she has given permission. Not only could it cost an
applicant his/her job, it is also illegal.
Perform a Background Check
•	If the applicant’s references are positive, be sure to
complete a federal criminal background check. Embezzlers move around from office to office.
Conduct Working Interview
•	Ask the applicant to come in for a half-day working
interview.
•	Observing the applicant in the office will provide an
indicator of the applicant’s current skills, ability to
work with others, ability to follow directions, speed of
work, and adaptability to your unique work environment.
Lunch Out and the Doctor Pays
•	If the working interview goes well, suggest that the
applicant have lunch with the team members with
whom they would be working most closely, to get to
know each other better. The doctor should pay for
this lunch but not attend. Ask the staff to observe and
give feedback on the applicant’s politeness, manners,
and personality outside the office. They should also
assess the applicant’s interest in the job itself, not just
the paycheck and benefits.
Ask the Team’s Opinion about Hiring the Applicant
•	Is the team comfortable with this person and willing
to let him/her into the “dental family”? No matter
how qualified the applicant, there will be problems
in the office, and the new hire will eventually leave if
the team is unsupportive of him/her.
Proper Certification
•	Make verification a condition for employment. It is
not uncommon to find dentists using assistants who
had indicated they were licensed to take x-rays but
who actually are not.
Offering the Applicant a Position
•	If the applicant is to be hired, the dentist should offer
the job using the term full-time or part-time employment and should avoid using the word permanent,
either orally or in writing. Use of the term permanent
denotes continuous work with a contractual understanding, regardless of problems that might develop
later. If dismissal should become necessary, the
employee might claim wrongful dismissal if promised
permanent employment.
•	If the applicant will not be hired following the first or
second interview, he or she may be told at that time
or notified within 1 week of either interview. If an

n

Practice Management

663

applicant is rejected, maintain all applications, test
forms, and other paperwork for at least 1 year in case
a complaint concerning unfair hiring practices is filed
by the rejected applicant.
•	If testing is part of the application and interviewing
process, testing must be standardized, that is, all applicants must be given identical tests.
Orientation and Training. In The One Minute Manager,
a book long-favored by business managers, Blanchard and
Johnson wrote, “Most companies spend 50% to 70% of
their money on people’s salaries, and yet spend less than
1% of their budget to train their people. Most companies,
in fact, spend more time and money on maintaining their
buildings and equipment than they do on maintaining
and developing people.”7 A new employee must be made
to feel welcome and a part of the team. Orientation on
the first day of employment and a written training schedule to be followed the first 6 to 8 weeks should be part of
this process.
Orientation. A training/benefits waiting period may be
the first 60 to 90 days of employment, during which time
the dentist determines whether there is a match between
office needs and a new employee’s skills and personal
style. Use of the term training/benefits waiting period rather
than probationary or trial period denotes the importance of
performance to the new employee, emphasizing that this
is considered a time to work diligently, to strive to learn
as much as possible.
  
•	Ask the employee to read the Office Manual and sign
a statement that he/she has read and agrees with the
office policies.
•	Review salary and benefits package.
•	Share and discuss the practice’s Patient and Team Mission Statements, what they mean, and how to “live”
them in the office.
•	Communicate your “practice culture”—who is in
charge of what, to whom the new employee reports,
attitudes and communication (those expected and
those that are not), as well as your practice philosophy and beliefs.
•	Review the written job description.
•	Create a list of duties in which the new employee
must be proficient. Mark the duties off as the employee demonstrates acceptable ability.
•	Introduce the new employee to all team members.
Encourage Team Relationships
•	Arrange to have different staff members who will be
working closely with the new employee go to lunch
with him/her.
Training Method: TELL-SHOW-DO. Much of the responsibility for training new employees can be delegated
to current staff. A well-trained veteran staff member may
become a Training Coordinator, available to instruct the
new employee, answer questions, and check progress. Although one person may efficiently coordinate training,
all other team members and the dentist should also be
involved in the process.
•	What do you know about this?
•	What are your strengths and weaknesses?
•	How can I best teach you?
•	How do you like to learn something new?

664

Chapter 31

n

Practice Management

•	Tell them what the “importance” of each function is
and how it fits into the “big picture.”
•	Tell them the “benchmark” of acceptable performance for each job function they have.
•	Ask them to role-play as much as possible. They will
not “own” the new behavior until they have done it
themselves a number of times.
Regular Coaching. Conduct a 5- to 10-minute debriefing with the employee at the end of each day for the first
2 weeks (every other day is sufficient for weeks 3 and 4).
Finally, the supervisor should conduct a 30-day review.
•	Tell him/her the following:
•	What he/she did well that day
•	What he/she needs to do differently and how
•	Where his/her focus should be the next day
•	Ask him/her the following:
•	What was your biggest struggle today?
•	What would you like me to help you with tomorrow?
•	What did you learn today that affected you the most?

Job Descriptions
•	Office Manager
•	Front Desk Systems Coordinator
•	Clinical Coordinator
•	Front Desk Staff
•	Clinical Assistant
•	Flow Coordinator
•	Sterilization Assistant
•	Hygienist
•	Hygiene Assistant
Office Manager. The doctor of a small practice can perform many of the employee management and business
administrative duties. Once a staff reaches a level of 5 to
6 or more employees or has more than one location, a
doctor should consider having an OM. Sometimes the
same person can function as the OM and the Front Desk
Coordinator. A good OM has the mindset that he/she is
an extension of the doctor and is vested in the success of
the practice. Doctors should realize they are putting their
financial security and future in the hands of their OM;
therefore this person must be strong and effective to help
run the practice efficiently. The following outlines may
be edited to fit the need of any office. See Figure 31-6 for
a schedule of front office tasks.
General Duties
•	Represent office and doctor
•	Make sure the facility presents well and is in working
order
•	Help the doctor with administrative duties
•	Handle patient/parent issues and complaints
•	Order necessary front office supplies
•	Make sure that computer backup is done daily
•	Oversee that bills are paid in a timely manner
•	Answer parents’ or patients’ questions concerning office procedures, financial matters, etc.
•	Maintain office calendar
•	Work to free the dentist from administrative details
•	Handle correspondence for the dentist when requested
Systems Management
•	Understand all of the goal numbers of the practice
and how to monitor them

•	Work toward meeting production goals; monitor total
practice and individual producers
•	Work toward meeting collection goals
•	Work toward meeting new-patient goals
•	Oversee the daily and monthly production monitor
•	Oversee all front desk systems and hold the appropriate front desk staff accountable for the performance
of each system
•	Oversee the clinical manager
•	Step in as a front desk staff member when needed
•	Communicate the status of practice operations with
the doctor weekly
•	Oversee that month-end reports are run
•	Make sure that each month is closed out in the practice management software
•	Print end-of-year reports
•	Oversee that deposits are made daily
•	Oversee internal/external marketing tasks
Employee Management
•	Hold employees accountable for proper job performance and appearance
•	Manage staff requests for time off
•	Enforce office policies
•	Maintain a file for each employee
•	Maintain updated personnel/office manual
•	Give verbal praise and appreciation to employees
•	Encourage employees’ growth and development
•	Conduct timely performance reviews of employees
•	Maintain appropriate staffing coverage
•	Manage new hires and exiting employees
•	Oversee employee time cards and payroll
•	Administer and interpret employee benefits
Leadership Duties
•	Show leadership behavior
•	Support doctor leadership
•	Exhibit professional behavior
•	Set appropriate example for employees to follow
•	Keep stress level low in office
•	Keep morale high in office
•	Direct the “morning meeting,” a brief meeting to plan
the day
Coordinators. If the practice is large enough, it can also
have a Clinical Coordinator and a Business Coordinator.
A Coordinator is an experienced staff member who also
shows leadership skills and enjoys using her or his initiative. The following outlines may be edited to fit the needs
of any office.
Front Desk Systems Coordinator Duties
•	Overall, coordinate the business desk; oversee scheduling, collections, insurance, customer service, running and working reports
•	Meet regularly with the doctor and OM
•	Suggest business area staffing needs
•	Help evaluate business staff performance
•	Help monitor practice statistics
•	Monitor daily deposits
Clinical Coordinator Duties
•	Overall, coordinate clinical area
•	Meet regularly with the doctor and OM
•	Suggest clinical staffing needs
•	Help evaluate clinical staff performance

Chapter 31

n

Practice Management

665

Front Office Tasks
Answering the
phones
Oversee office
equipment/supplies
Sorting the mail

Balancing deposit
Sending out newpatient packets
Settling the credit
card machine
Adjust the schedule
accordingly

Basic Tasks
Checking patient
Reviewing patient
eligibility
paperwork
Scheduling next
Checking out
Entering patient
appointments
patients
insurance
Cleaning the office
Manage telephone greetings;
Change the voicemail message when needed
Greeting patients

Daily Tasks
Sending out claims
Entering insurance
payments
Sending out thank
Sending out thank
you notes to new
you notes to the patients
patients
who have referred
patients
Pre-authorizations
Answer e-mails
for insurance
Checking for EFT
Checking patient
payments
communication software
reports/marking
patients confirmed

Processing
CareCredit
Sending out thank
you notes for online
reviews
Confirm patients
Daily Monitor

Track treatment
diagnosed

Check outstanding
claims
Call on unscheduled
treatment plans
Scan in paperwork

Weekly Tasks
Send out statements
Collection calls
Call past due recare
patients
Office walk-through
inspection

Check supplies

Monthly Tasks
Send out recare cards

Month-end reports

Purge magazines

Patient credit report
and letters

Enter and update PPO
fee schedules

Collection letters
Enter new-patient
paperwork

Patient purge

Monthly Team
Meeting

Figure 31-6 Front office tasks. (©Julie Weir & Associates Management Consulting.)

•	Coordinate office-wide OSHA training
•	Direct and maintain clinical staff work schedules
•	Assign collateral duties to clinical staff
•	Help schedulers with scheduling questions
•	Direct flow of patients through the clinical area
•	Make certain that all systems are consistent, e.g., data
entry, paperwork, laboratory delivery, etc.
•	Help plan and maintain clinical area budget
•	Supervise clinical supply inventory and ordering
Front Desk Staff Duties
Patient Management
•	Greet each patient, preferably by name
•	Answer phone by third ring
•	Check messages, return calls
•	Announce patients to back office
•	Tell patients that the practice always welcomes new
patients
•	Promote the practice outside of the office, as appropriate
Scheduling
•	Schedule to goal, fill openings, and keep the schedule
productive

•	Confirm all patients’ appointments 2 days in advance
•	Review patients’ charts (Electronic Health Records
[EHR]) as necessary the day before their appointment
•	Print schedule for next day and 3 days out for the
morning meeting; write the producer production
totals on each schedule
•	Enter treatment plans, discuss with patient, secure financing, sign consent form(s), and schedule
appointment(s)
Collections
•	Collect all estimated portions, deductibles, and fees
•	Verify insurance benefits for patients and send predeterminations, as needed
•	File claims with insurance
•	Follow up with outstanding insurance and accounts
•	Post all payments received
•	Process statements
Treatment Tracking of Recare and Unfinished
Restorative Work
•	Manage the patient communication software (PCS),
e.g., Lighthouse

666

Chapter 31

n

Practice Management

•	Make phone calls to parents of children who are due
for recare visits and keep the overdue recare report
current
•	Ensure that the PCS mails the recare postcards to
those who are due for an appointment but for whom
there are no e-mail addresses
•	Make phone calls to parents of children who have an
unfinished treatment plan and keep the report current
Miscellaneous
•	Pull and file charts
•	Check patients in/out
•	Note changes to patients in computer and chart
•	Inactivate charts as needed
•	Keep the front office, waiting room, and bathroom in
order
•	Close out the preceding day (deposit, day sheet, credit
cards)
•	Initiate computer backup
Monthly Duties
•	Generate billing statements
•	Print month-end reports, production/collection, referral
•	Close out the month in the computer
Clinical Assistant Duties
•	Patient care
•	Chart review
•	Set up rooms for procedure
•	Seat patient and prepare patient for treatment
•	Assist dentist during any procedures
•	Provide patient education and postoperative instruction
•	Dismiss patient to front desk
•	Take x-rays
•	Follow infection control procedures
•	Perform basic sterilizing techniques for instruments
•	Sterilize treatment room after use
•	Stock treatment rooms with supplies
•	Pour and trim models
•	Perform lab work
•	Maintain equipment
•	Assist other team members, if time allows
•	Tell patients that the practice always welcomes new
patients
•	Promote the practice outside of the office, as appropriate
Flow Coordinator Duties. A flow coordinator is a clinical assistant who also watches the overall schedule and
directs the doctor and other assistants to keep the schedule flowing on time.
Sterilization Assistant
•	Turns over chairs and sterilizes instruments
•	Provides backup for the restorative and hygiene assistants
Dental Hygienist Duties
•	Provides patient care: prophylaxis, radiographs, fluoride treatments, sealants, impressions
•	Reviews radiographs, teeth, and soft tissue for decay
and anomalies and informs the doctor of findings
•	Charts results
•	Reviews charts
•	Sets up room for procedure
•	Seats patient and prepares patient for treatment
•	Assists dentist during examinations

•	Provides patient education
•	Dismisses patient to front desk
•	Follows infection control procedures
•	Performs basic sterilizing techniques for instruments
•	Sterilizes treatment room after use
•	Stocks treatment rooms with supplies
•	Maintains equipment
•	Assists other team members, if time allows
•	Assists front desk with the recare system as needed, if
time allows
•	Tells patients that the practice always welcomes new
patients
•	Promotes the practice outside of the office, as appropriate
Hygiene Assistant Duties. A hygiene assistant assists
the hygienist and/or coronal polishing assistant with the
flow of recare patients. For every two columns of recare
scheduled for 30-minute appointments, one hygiene assistant is needed to help keep the schedule on time.
•	Greets parent
•	Confirms medical history and treatment
•	Takes radiographs
•	Seats patient
•	Turns over chairs and instruments
•	Assists doctor with examination and charting
•	Works to educate patient
•	Escorts parent/patient to front desk
Performance Reviews. A well-done performance review
is a powerful leadership tool for the doctor and a great
learning experience for the employee. Team members
must know what they are expected to do, how to do it,
and what the criteria are for an acceptable or, better yet,
outstanding job performance. Employees want to feel
that their presence is valued and contributes a positive
difference that is recognized.
The following steps will make the performance review
a positive learning experience:
•	Set aside one day a year for all annual reviews instead
of trying to do a review on each employee’s employment anniversary.
•	Treat the review like any other important business
meeting. Set aside at least 45 minutes. Do not reschedule this meeting; this is a significant event on
your employee’s calendar.
•	Prepare for the meeting ahead of time. An evaluation
form is completed, and talking points are prepared by
the doctor on the following:
•	Employee accomplishments since the last review
•	Employee strengths that the doctor appreciates
•	New duties and levels of job performance
•	Two weeks before the review date, the employee is given
the review form for self-evaluation of his/her performance and then returns the form to the doctor 1 week
prior to review. This advance information gives the doctor time to understand the employee’s view of his/her
level of performance and helps the doctor prepare their
discussion points and coaching for improvement.
•	It is also beneficial to use a form that asks the employee to identify goals and challenges for the next
year. Discussing the staff member’s opinion of his or
her own performance often makes the appraisal more

Chapter 31

meaningful. Each job should have understandable
benchmarks of acceptable performance, which must
be communicated to the employee. For example, the
person in charge of collections should be collecting
98% or more of collectable fees with an “accounts receivable to collectable fees” ratio of 1:1, and not more
than 18% to 25% of the accounts receivable should be
over 90 days. If any one of these criteria is not being
met, then the employee will know exactly where to
concentrate his/her efforts to improve. Benchmarks
can also be set for scheduling to goal, working recare
and unfinished treatment plans reports, and clinical
performance.
•	Job skills and work performance should be reviewed separately from salary. A conversation that
combines performance review with news of a raise
interferes with the staff member’s concentration.
An employee may be so interested in hearing about
a salary increase that setting goals for performance
improvement is relegated to a secondary level of
importance.
•	It should be clearly communicated to employees that
annual raises and/or bonuses are given for making
themselves more valuable to the practice through
improved skills and a motivated attitude, not for just
being there another year.
•	During periods of economic difficulty, instead of annual raises, quarterly bonuses can be tied to increased
practice performance over the previous year, or
monthly bonuses on a 3-month rolling average.

Coach to Improve Performance
1.	Ask yourself: As their leader, have I provided the
appropriate training, time, and tools for them to
perform adequately? If not, provide these items and
see if the desired job performance is achieved.
2.	Speak directly to the employee. Do not complain to
other employees about the poor performer. This is
gossip and destructive to the team.
3.	Tell them what they are doing well or what you
value in their performance. People listen better
when they feel that the appraiser recognizes their
strengths rather than only their deficiencies. Use the
term opportunities for growth rather than weaknesses
when discussing areas to be improved
4.	Tell them specifically what you want done differently.
5.	Tell them specifically how you want it done differently.
•	Most people respond best when asked to concentrate on no more than three or four areas for
development.
6.	Ask them, “Is this something you think you can
do?”
•	If they answer no, ask them why.
•	The dentist may offer to help the employee improve in certain areas through additional training
and CE courses, thereby giving the staff member a
sense of support.
7.	Ask them, “Is this something you want to do?”
•	If they answer no, ask them why. Determine if you
are dealing with insubordination or lack of motivation in seeing the importance of the task.

n

Practice Management

667

8.	Establish a time frame for improvements; between
1 and 3 months is usually appropriate. The dentist
and the staff member should meet frequently in the
interim to assess improvements.
9.	If the behavior/job performance is strongly
lacking (e.g., consistently arriving late, abusing
sick leave, breaching confidentiality requirements,
or unable to perform at required skill levels), tell
the employee:
•	He/she needs to know that his/her job is in jeopardy and that he/she is on probation until job
performance improves.
•	If the requested change does not take place, he/she
will be terminated.
•	Your goal is to help every employee reach his/
her full potential, but it is up to the individual to
choose to be successful in your practice.
10.	Document all conversations, including dates, times,
and information exchanged at all meetings with
employees, when job performance is discussed. This
is important for reference in the event the employee
is terminated.

Dismissal
Dismissal of an employee is one of the most difficult
tasks a dentist may face. There are, however, processes
that can make a dismissal less stressful. Dismissal usually
happens because of incompetence in job performance or
unacceptable behavior such as patient abuse, sabotage,
theft, harassment, or substance abuse on the premises.
Problems often arise when an employee loses interest and
therefore effectiveness and/or efficiency in her or his responsibilities. Behavior and performance problems must
be addressed; simply ignoring the situation will not make
it go away. The dentist and staff member should discuss
the problems and ways they can be rectified. If the ten
steps outlined in the previous section “Coach to Improve
Performance” have been gone through and the employee
will not or cannot improve behavior or achieve required
skill levels, dismissal will be necessary.
•	Prepare a document stating that the employee is being terminated and why. Check with an employment
attorney to be sure you are following your state’s
labor laws. After this statement is explained, the employee and the dentist should sign and date the statement, and it should be retained in that individual’s
personnel file.
•	If an employee refuses to sign and date notes from
any discussion, the dentist should so note on the
statement and sign and date the document him/
herself. Such a note is an acceptable record that the
discussion occurred.
•	It is important for a dentist to avoid a wrongful termination lawsuit, which is why documentation of all
meetings with the employee is important, even more
so if the employee is in one of the following protected
classes of employees:
•	Race
•	Religion
•	Age (40 years and over)
•	Pregnancy

668

Chapter 31

n

Practice Management

•	Disability
•	Sexual orientation
•	It is best to seek advice from a lawyer versed in labor relations if the dentist is unclear about the proper way to
discipline or dismiss an employee. It is much less costly
to pay an attorney than to be involved in a wrongful
dismissal lawsuit with a disgruntled employee.
•	In most states, no notice is necessary for dismissal
related to unlawful behavior such as stealing, patient mistreatment, or deliberate property damage.
The staff member committing such actions can be
dismissed immediately if such actions can be proved
indisputably. It should be clearly stated in the office
manual that such conduct will not be tolerated and
will result in immediate dismissal.
•	A dismissed employee should always leave immediately after the termination conversation. The dentist
may pay severance wages, but payment is not mandatory in all states. (The dentist should check with an
attorney about state law and write the policy in the
office manual.) It is unwise for an employee who was
fired to remain on the job. The dismissed person may
sabotage the practice, even unconsciously, and bother
other staff members with the details of termination.
Thus a dentist may pay a penalty for being kindhearted enough to let a fired employee keep working
until he or she finds another job.
•	The dismissed employee should be given his/her final
paycheck, return office keys, and be accompanied by
the OM as he/she collects his/her belongings. The
best safeguard is to change locks and all passwords.

Wages, Raises, and Benefits
Fair salaries and good benefits are necessary to avoid job
dissatisfaction; however, salary and benefits do not necessarily motivate an employee to perform better. Motivated
staff members are most often those to whom responsibility is delegated. Their personal and professional growth is
encouraged and recognized by the dentist. They are appreciated and told how valuable they are to the office, the dentist, and the patients. In short, motivated staff members are
recognized for the contributions they make to the practice,
and money is only one way appreciation is shown.
There must be a balance among managing payroll costs,
sharing practice income and profits equitably with staff
members, and maintaining careful control of expenses.
Team members should understand that their actions have
a direct impact on their raises and benefits. Increased productivity creates additional profits the doctor can share,
and reduced productivity will delay raises and benefits.
•	Hourly wages should be commensurate with community wage scales. The dentist should survey similar jobs in
other practices in the area to determine minimum and
maximum pay ranges. It is financially more prudent to
pay employees hourly rather than pay them a salary.
•	Wages and benefits should be reviewed yearly. Raises
are based on merit (positive behavior and increased
skills), increases in cost of living (inflation), and the
overall economic status of the practice. If the practice
has had increased profitability and raises are neglected, good employees may quit.

•	The relative worth of each position—including business positions (e.g., receptionist, scheduling coordinator, patient accounts coordinator) and clinical positions (e.g., clinical assistant, hygienist, sterilization/
laboratory assistant)—to the practice is determined
based on answers to the following questions:
1.	How long would it take to find a replacement?
2.	Are there specific certification, education, or training requirements?
3.	What is the value of longevity in this position?
4.	How skilled is a certain individual?
  
The more competent, valuable, and difficult to replace
the employee is, the higher the wage should be.
Employees receive more than wages; net pay is only
one part of a total compensation package. Although higher take-home pay with fewer benefits may attract some
employees, fair wages with expanded benefits generally
help retain team members. Each employee should be given an annual total compensation statement listing gross
wages, employer-paid taxes, and the dollar value of benefits such as vacation, personal leave, insurance, uniform
allowance, and free or reduced-cost dental care. Receiving
an actual statement of wages and benefits lets employees
perceive their full value.

PART 5: SYSTEMS
NEW-PATIENT APPOINTMENT
The first impression that sets the foundation for a longterm relationship with parents and patients is established
at the new-patient appointment. The website is typically
the parent’s first contact with the office, and the telephone
is the first contact with a team member. Therefore it is paramount that the website be well done and that the telephone
is answered by a friendly and helpful person who is great
at building relationships quickly. The office must be represented as organized and knowledgeable. Speaking highly of
the doctor and staff will instill trust and confidence in the
parent about your practice and give parents the impression
that they are making a good decision to bring their child
to your practice for dental care. Always remember that the
parents chose your office over other offices in the area, and
if they are not treated well, they will go elsewhere.

Initial Telephone Call
•	Gather information from the parent using a New
Patient Information form (Fig. 31-7).
•	Refer the parent to your website for more information
about the practice and ask them to complete the New
Patient forms prior to their visit. Many software programs can be set up for this information to download
automatically into your dental software.
•	Schedule the new patient within 1 week of the call—
block time in your schedule for new patients.
•	Send the parent an e-mail with the links to your website and the New Patient paperwork. This is a marketing opportunity to thank him/her for scheduling and
let him/her know that you are looking forward to
seeing him/her. Customer service tip: Always make it
easy for the parent to do business with you.

Chapter 31

n

Practice Management

Thank you for calling [dental office]. This is [your name]. How may I help you?
Parent states he or she is calling to make an appt. May I ask your name … and the name of your child?
When did we see your child last?

Parent's Name

Today's Date

Who may we thank for referring you? Get the specifics.

Patient's Name

Age

Date of Birth

Tell me a little about [child's name] favorite interest, sport, toy, pet, or color.
Any medical or dental concerns?
Prior dental experiences?

Patient's Address
Home Phone

Work Phone

Cell Phone

E-mail Address
For your convenience we will confirm your appointment by text, e-mail, or both. Which would you prefer? T E

B

Will we be helping you file insurance? Y N - Enter Insurance info on the back.
If pt indicates dental problems, ask the five questions
What area is bothering pt?
How long has this been bothering pt?
Sensitive to hot or cold or pressure?
Does it keep pt up at night?
Is there any swelling?
When was your last cleaning?
Now that we have collected all of your information, let's see when we can reserve an appointment for [child's name]. We have an
appointment available on [date] at [time] or [date] at [time]. If parent objects, ask for his or her concern so you can overcome the
objection. I understand [objection]. We have reserved time for our new patients at [indicate times] because this allows the
doctor the appropriate amount of time to evaluate your child, and we find that children do best at these times. I have [date] at
[time] or [date] at [time] available.
[Patient Name] is going to love [Dr. Name] and our entire staff. Our office is decorated [describe theme], and we have great toys
and games. You're welcome to come early so [patient name] can play before his/her scheduled appt. He/She will have a great
experience. Thank you for choosing our office. We'll take great care of [patient name].
Please visit our website at [website] and complete the registration paperwork. It would be ideal if you could do so within the
next 24 hours. By completing the registration online, you won't need to do any paperwork when you arrive. Everything
will be completed and we can see [patient] without delay.
We look forward to meeting you and [child's name] on [date] at [time]. You will receive an electronic confirmation by [text,
e-mail]. Simply click the Confirm option and the appointment will be confirmed. May I ask a favor? If for any reason you need
to change this appointment please contact us at least 2 business days in advance. We appreciate your consideration, and we
will look forward to meeting you. Is there anything else we can help you with?

Figure 31-7 New-patient information. (©Julie Weir & Associates Management Consulting.)

669

670

Chapter 31

n

Practice Management

Before the New-Patient Appointment
•	Verify eligibility and dental insurance coverage, if
needed, and ensure that the New Patient paperwork
has been received.

New-Patient Appointment in the Office
•	New-patient appointments should always run on time.
•	From the moment the new patient walks in the door,
your staff should be on target for excellent customer
service. Team members should smile and make sure
they connect with the patient and parents. Remember, people don’t care how much you know until they
know how much you care.
•	The greeter should rise to greet the parent/patient and
introduce him/herself with an outstretched arm to
shake their hands. Let the parent/patient know you
are glad that they chose your office.
•	A well-trained team member should escort newpatient arrivals to a conference room or the ­operatory.
At this time the staff person should review with
parents the child’s health history and the anticipated
treatment to be performed that day, recording pertinent notes for the dentist.
•	The dentist should be introduced by the staff member
who interviewed the new patient and parents. After
a short conversation addressed mainly to the patient,
the dentist should again review the health history
with the parents, reading notes made by the staff
member during the interview. This routine provides
two opportunities to ensure that the health history
has been correctly completed and that the review
with parents is documented. If the initial conversation occurred in a conference room, the dentist
should leave while the team member prepares to take
the child to the operatory. In this way, if the child
is upset, the dentist, who must gain the child’s full
cooperation during the dental examination, is not
involved.
•	The pass-off of the child from person to person
should be very positive. “Ann, I would like you to
meet Billy. Billy, you are so lucky, you get to see my
friend Ann today. And you know what? She is going
to get your teeth sparkling clean! You will love her!”
At check-out: “Wow, Ann did a fabulous job cleaning
your teeth!”
•	In many offices, parents accompany their child to
the operatory. Sometimes this can be a distraction
for the child; however, the presence of parents in the
operatory is a reality in many pediatric dental offices
in today’s litigious society. The dentist can, however,
wisely limit the number of adults accompanying each
patient to the operatory and also forbid their use of
cell phones.
•	At some point during the first appointment, an
assistant or hygienist should give home care instructions utilizing a Tell-Show-Do method. The
staff member should also impart information about
recommendations if fluoride is not in the child’s
drinking water, healthy snacks, bottle habits (if
appropriate), and the importance of maintaining
regular preventive visits.

•	After the examination the dentist should present the
case to the parents, who usually want answers to the
following questions: What is wrong? Can it be fixed?
How much will it cost?
•	The practitioner should answer “What is wrong
and how it can be fixed?” when presenting the
treatment plan, using language that the parent can
understand. Do not use excessive clinical terminology, which only intimidates and confuses the
parent.
•	The front desk staff will answer the question, “How
much will it cost?”
•	When explaining treatment, always tie the treatment to the benefits that will result, any motivators that the parent has shared, and the consequences of no treatment.
•	Utilize pictures and samples of recommended treatment to help the parent understand.
•	The doctor should close the case by asking the
parent, “Mrs. Jones, If you do not have any other
questions, is this the treatment plan you would
like me to complete for Johnny?” If the parent
has questions or objections, the doctor is the best
person to address the parent’s concerns and not
put this burden on the front desk staff to close the
case.
•	The dentist may wish to rehearse case presentations with staff members, seeking their critique
and suggestions.
•	The patient and parents are then escorted to a checkout area. The next appointment is usually scheduled
before the fee is collected.
•	A written treatment plan is presented to the parent.
•	The parent is told the total cost and his/her estimated portion that will be due at the appointment.
•	The patient/parent signs or initials the treatment
plan and is given a copy.
•	After check-out, a staff member should express thanks
to the parents for choosing the office and let them
know that if any of their friends would enjoy the
same experience, new patients are always welcome.
•	The child and parents should leave the office feeling
that the dentist and staff are extraordinarily caring,
thorough, skilled, and efficient. The lasting impression should make both the parents and the child
look forward to their next visit and eager to recommend the practice to other family members and
friends.

Forms
Forms for the pediatric patient need to take into consideration the circumstances of multiple parents, multiple
e-mail addresses, and dual insurance as well as multiple
mailing addresses. Consider adding a section for a list of
people authorized to bring the patient to appointments.
Many companies have designed forms for purchase to
use in the dental office. It is always advised that forms
be reviewed by your liability insurance lawyer to ensure
state and federal compliance. Often, organizations such
as AAPD, ADA, and your liability insurance company can
provide the office with sample forms for personalization.

Chapter 31

There are also companies that can integrate your forms
into your website for parents to complete online.
List of patient forms required for the dental office:
•	Medical history
•	Patient demographics/information form
•	HIPAA compliance forms
•	Perpetual release for photos and patient reviews
•	Financial Policy Form
•	Appointment Policy
•	Consent for treatment/nitrous oxide use
•	Oral sedation form
•	Hospital forms

EFFECTIVE SCHEDULING
Offices are more efficient and productive when there is a
proactive approach to scheduling the “ideal day” by using block scheduling and daily restorative and recare producer goals. Block scheduling controls the work pace and
productivity level of the day, in contrast to a day in which
appointments are haphazardly scheduled, which causes
stress and chaos.
The telephone connects patients to the practice, and
it must be answered in a cheerful and professional manner. The attitude of the appointment secretary can give a
positive impression, making scheduling a pleasant experience, or create a negative one, resulting in no appointment being made. The appointment secretary should
listen carefully to each parent or patient and try to be
accommodating while offering choices of appointment
times that work with the block scheduling.
Since most offices have multiple people scheduling patients, it is essential that the block schedule be easy to
follow and that blocks be clearly labeled for appointment
types. Many software systems have the ability to set up
block scheduling and producer goal monitoring.
Consider the following when scheduling:
•	Not all procedures should be scheduled for the same
amount of time. Consider qualifying each treatment appointment as either a simple or complex
­appointment, giving each one a specific amount of
time for its respective category and alternating them
in the schedule.
•	Schedule to meet producer goals for restorative, recare, and Hospital/GA.
•	Monitor the number of doctor and recare work days
each month to meet the monthly production goal.
Schedule morning appointments for more complex
treatments to accommodate patient behaviors.
•	Allow for uninterrupted time with the doctor when
sedation is involved.
•	Block enough appointments for new patients.
•	Accommodate short time slots for lap examinations,
consultations, and postoperative appointments.
•	Leave slots available for urgent procedures once your
appointment schedule is at capacity.
  
If a patient fails to keep an appointment, a staff member should telephone the parents within 10 minutes. If
unsuccessful, call again within 24 hours. If the parents
cannot be reached by telephone, a message, perhaps by
e-mail or, failing that, by regular mail, should be sent asking them to contact the office. If the appointment cannot

n

Practice Management

671

be rescheduled, the patient must be listed or flagged in
the computer. At the end of each month, a broken appointment list can be printed so that patients with failed
appointments can be re-contacted.
Efficiency must be maximized in the scheduling of patients with low-reimbursement plans, or providing care
to these patients may become cost-prohibitive. Consider
the following:
•	Schedule during the hardest times of the day to fill
(if the plan allows the doctor to dictate appointment time). Normally this is between 10:00 AM and
2:00 PM.
•	Understand the volume required. Typically a procedure must be done 3 to 5 times more often to get the
same dollar out as one full-fee procedure.
•	Delegate as much as possible to dental staff, within
the constraints of state law.
•	Track new patients in Lower Fee Plans separately from
Private Pay patients. Put limits by age or number/
month on Lower Fee Plan patients if necessary.
•	Have a strict “no-show, short cancel” policy. Dismiss
at first or second no-show.
•	Have parents sign an appointment policy form. These
polices can be different from those for Private Pay
patients.

SURGICAL REFERRALS
Some pediatric dentists have instituted a section of their
practice entitled Surgical Referrals, indicating care for
patients who need dental treatment and meet American
Academy of Pediatric Dentistry Guidelines for General
Anesthesia. This particular program is one in which a patient is treated under GA and then sent back to the referring doctor, mimicking the approach frequently used by
some other specialties such as oral surgery.
These patients may be seen for an initial examination by the pediatric dentist, treated in the proper setting
while under GA, seen for at least one postoperative visit,
and, if appropriate, returned to the referring doctor.

MANAGING COLLECTIONS
Prevention is the key to successful collections. A clearly
stated financial policy (Fig. 31-8), presented to parents in
a professional manner, and insurance plan information
correctly entered into the practice management software
will prevent uncollected balances. In offices that accept
the assignment of insurance or allow patients to pay dental fees on a payment plan, 1 month’s gross production
is the recommended guideline for total accounts receivable. When the accounts receivable total is more than 1
month’s production, cash flow suffers and many accounts
become uncollectible.

Collect Accurate Insurance Information for Patients
with Insurance Coverage
•	Insurance company’s name, telephone number, and
plan number
•	Employer’s name, telephone number, and contact
person
•	Deductible requirements and amount
•	Maximum annual and lifetime benefits

672

Chapter 31

n

Practice Management

Financial Policy
We are pleased to welcome you to our practice. Our desire is to provide you with the highest quality dental care in a
caring and enjoyable atmosphere. It is our policy to make definite financial arrangements with you before any
treatment starts. Below is an explanation of our payment procedures. If you have any questions, please do not hesitate
to ask.

1.

Payment for services is due at the time services are rendered. We accept cash, checks, and credit cards.

2.

For new-patient emergency visits we require payment in full at the time of the appointment.

3.

As a courtesy, we will provide you with a copy of the charges to submit to your insurance carrier for your
reimbursement or you may assign the payment to our office and we will file the insurance for you.

4.

Our office will file your insurance claim a maximum of two times per appointment.

5.

If the claim is not paid by your insurance carrier within sixty days, you will be responsible for the full
balance and further insurance appeal becomes your responsibility. We will be happy to provide you with a
claim form so that you can follow up on your insurance claims personally.

6.

You must provide the office with a dental insurance card with the proper mailing address of the insurance
company, or provide a dental claim form, which is provided by the employer. If one of these documents is not
available at the time of the appointment, you will be responsible for payment of all fees and we will provide you
with a claim form for you to submit for reimbursement .

7.

If insurance benefits are assigned to the doctor, you will be responsible for paying your deductible and copayments at the time of service. You are responsible for paying all charges not covered by your insurance
company. Your insurance benefits are a contract between you and your employer. The amount of coverage you
will receive will depend on the quality of the plan purchased by your employer, not the fees of the doctor.

8.

The office cannot carry balances longer than 60 days, regardless if the insurance payment is still pending. A
$5.00 monthly re-billing charge will be added to your account if it is not paid within 60 days, regardless of balance
amount.

9.

After 60 days, we will inform you of the delinquent account by letter and if no action is taken to clear the account,
this office will be required to employ a collection service to collect payment. The responsible party agrees to pay
all reasonable, related collection fees.

10.

There will be a $30.00 service charge for all returned checks.

11.

The parent or guardian who brings the child for his or her initial visit is responsible for payment
independent of what a divorce decree or custody arrangement may state. Reimbursement must be made
between the divorced parents. We will not intervene.

AUTHORIZATION
I have read & accept the above Financial Policy, understand it, & agree to the terms set forth regarding payment.

Signature of Responsible Party

Date

Figure 31-8 Financial policy. (©Julie Weir & Associates Management Consulting.)

•	Pre-estimate requirements
•	Percent or scheduled amount paid on various procedures, including preventive and orthodontic treatment
•	Any exclusions

Collect All Patient Payments, Deductibles,
and Co-Payments at the Time of Service
•	Train parents to pay their portion at the time of
service by presenting accurate treatment plans and
informing the parents of their co-payment amount
that will be due before the parents schedule the next
appointment.
•	When parents do not pay on the day of treatment, a
statement with an envelope addressed to the office
should be presented at check-out.

Preparing Deposits
Daily deposits should be compared with the reports generated from the software system. To prevent embezzlement, the staff member preparing deposits should be
­different from the one who is entering payments into the
system. Further, the doctor should take the office deposit
to the bank.

Sending Statements
Every software system has the capacity to either send
statements directly or integrate with a vendor that offers
electronic billing services, which is typically more costeffective by saving the cost of postage, staff labor, and
envelopes. What once took 2 hours can be done in less
than 5 minutes and pays for itself.

Chapter 31

n

Practice Management

673

Follow all state debt collection laws regarding phone
calls, written communication, and e-mails in attempts
to collect the bad debt. It is essential that you document
all collection activity. Make sure that every letter, every
phone call, and every e-mail are documented in your dental software. You want to be able to prove that you took
every measure possible to collect payment before sending
the account to collections.

Accounts Receivable Report

Figure 31-9 Value of a dollar when not collected.

•	Send statements daily after posting payments. Select
all accounts with a balance and to which statements
have not been sent within the preceding 21 days. This
will also cover all balances after insurance payments
have been posted. This is much easier than processing
individual statements each time a balance is left after
a claim has been paid. The due date for payments
should be in 14 days.
•	An account on which no payment has been made for
30 to 60 days may be considered overdue. Sending an
e-mail reminder is an effective way to contact patients
when they are not responding to the traditional statements. The value of a dollar greatly diminishes over
time (Fig. 31-9).
•	If there is no response or payment by 90 days, the account may be forwarded for outside collection action
after the dentist reviews the account and gives approval.
•	Laws concerning collection techniques and the do’s
and don’ts for collecting overdue accounts vary
from state to state. Therefore the dentist must make
certain that his or her patient accounts coordinator is
well-trained in the legalities of pursuing delinquent
accounts in that state.
•	Have a signed financial policy that allows you to collect all legal fees, interest, and collection agency fees
from the patient.
•	Consider using a pre-collect service, before a collection
agency, which charges a flat fee per account. The accounts can then be transferred to a collection agency if
payment is not recouped. Collection agencies typically
charge about 50% of the balance for their collection fee.
•	Once an account is sent to collections, write off the
account balance and dismiss the patient from the practice. The account balance should be written off with a
code reflecting that it was sent to a collection agency.
•	Send the patient a dismissal that includes the availability of emergency care for 30 days, to avoid accusations of patient abandonment.
Remove any scheduled appointments of the dismissed
patient and his/her family members, and inactivate these
patients in your system. If the patient’s treatment is incomplete or the patient has an appliance or prosthetic
device, the dentist should seek legal counsel before designating the patient’s chart as inactive and sending the
­account for outside collection action. An attorney can
best advise on patient abandonment issues so that potential legal problems are avoided.

•	Print monthly and review all accounts with balances
past 30 days.
•	Take the appropriate action to collect the balance:
•	Resubmit to the insurance company for payment
•	Send the parent a statement
•	Call the parent
•	Send the account to collection

MANAGING INSURANCE
The acceptance of insurance assignment can be a good
marketing tool because it attracts patients to the office.
Parents are more likely to accept treatment for their child
if they have additional financial assistance. However, to
maintain healthy accounts receivable, it is essential to
take a proactive approach with dental insurance by obtaining the patient’s dental benefit coverage before he/
she arrives for the appointment.

Steps for Effective Insurance Management
Practice management software programs are set up to calculate the patient’s correct insurance coverage through
the use of a Coverage Table and a Payment Table for each
insurance plan when these tables are used correctly and
consistently by the front desk staff.
The Coverage Table contains information on the insurance plan’s deductible, maximum, and percentage of
coverage for preventive, restorative, etc. The Payment Table, when utilized correctly, allows the software to build a
history of the actual payment amounts received from the
insurance plan for each procedure. This creates a more
accurate estimate of insurance coverage for the parent instead of relying only on the insurance plan’s stated percent of coverage for a procedure.
1.	Sign up for online management of insurance companies. Most insurance companies allow you to check
patient eligibility, check claim status, and submit
claims online through their websites.
2.	Understand the latest CDT (Current Dental
­Terminology) codes. The ADA’s current handbook
on CDT codes is available from http://ebusiness.ada
.org/.8 Periodically review the insurance company’s
fee schedules to understand the codes for benefits
covered and the reimbursement levels, to maximize
your coding and coverage.
3.	Collect insurance information on the phone during
the new-patient phone call, and make a copy of the
dental benefits card when new patients arrive in
your office.
4.	Contact the dental insurance company to confirm
eligibility and use a detailed form for collecting
information on insurance benefits coverage
(Fig. 31-10).

674

Chapter 31

Practice Management

n

INSURANCE VERIFICATION

Patient Name

DOB

Relationship

Name of Insured

ID # or SS # (as it appears on card)

Employer

Insured's DOB

Name of Insurance Company

Insurance Company Phone Number

Group #

Address of Insurance Company
Insurance Rep

Effective Date

Benefit Year - Renewal Month

Yearly Max

Max Used

Ind Deduct

Deduct Met?

Preventive %

Basic %

Major %

Family Deduct

Elig/Cov
Procedure

Y

N

Benefit Category
Prev

Basic

Maj

Freq/Lim

Date of Last?

Comments

Comp Rxam D0150
Per Exam D0120
Infant Exam D0145
Child Prophy D1120
Adult Prophy D1110
Fluoride D1206
2 BWX D0272
4 BWX D0274
Psno F0330
BW/Pano Bundle as
D0210
Sealants D1351
Sealants D1352
Endo D3000
Space Maintainers
D1515
Night Guard D9940
SS Crowns
Ortho
Post Comp D2391/2/3
In Off Sedation D9240
Nitrous D9230
Hospital Case D9420
Waiting Periods
Non-Duplication?

Figure 31-10 Insurance benefits. (©Julie Weir & Associates Management Consulting.)

Chapter 31

5.	Enter the patient’s insurance information into the
dental software. Benefits are based on the employer/
group number, not the insurance company. (If two
guarantors have Delta Dental and they work for
different companies, their benefits will be
different.)
6.	Attach a fee schedule to the Coverage Table for each
In-Network plan. This will provide accurate estimates and will minimize time-consuming adjustments, refunds, and billing statements.
7.	Attach a fee schedule to an employer only for PPO
programs. Attaching a fee schedule will ensure that
your accounts receivable numbers reflect the actual
amount that you will receive from the services
rendered, and it will also create accurate treatment
plans and patient estimates.
8.	The provider must submit a claim for all procedures
performed, regardless of coverage for those procedures. Always submit claims with your full fees so
the insurance company will have a record of the
full fee amount for the procedures. This will also be
reflected on the Explanation of Benefits.
9.	Once the appointment is “set complete,” an insurance claim should be generated by the software
system and batched. After the providers have
reviewed daily services and deemed them accurate, send the batched claims electronically for
payment. The insurance company will review the
claim and send a payment. You can track the progress of the claims online through most insurance
websites.
10.	When the insurance claim is received, check to
see what the insurance company paid, what the
patient portion should be, and what the patient
was charged. Do not make adjustments based on
the explanation of benefits without checking to see
how much the patient was charged. For instance:
The patient’s account shows a cleaning for $75, a
new-patient exam for $75, and an FMX for $100, for
a total of $250. If the payment comes back and the
insurance paid $200, stating that the patient portion for this claim is $0, then you know you have
to “adjust off” the $50. If the company paid $200
and states that the patient portion is $25, then the
adjustment would be $25.
11.	Enter the insurance payments by each procedure
instead of entering the bulk insurance payment for
the total claim. This way the software “learns” the true
coverage and the Payment Table will then override
the Coverage Table as it builds this information and
then be able to produce more accurate co-payment
amounts on treatment plans. The Payment Table must
be updated each time after insurance payments are
entered.
12.	Send preauthorizations for dental treatment to
insurance companies only when the insurance company requires it or when services are expected to be
over $2000.
13.	Each week, generage an Outstanding Insurance
Claims Report so that overdue claims can be pursued. The insurance coordinator should call the

n

Practice Management

675

insurance company to inquire about payment and

carry out needed actions for payment to be received.
  

It is important to help the parents understand that
they, not the doctor, have the contract with the insurance company, and that the parents can call their insurance company at any time to discuss what their patient
portion should be. Sometimes you will have to politely
remind them that the insurance company, not the dental
office, determines their patient portion.

Coordination of Benefits
When a patient has more than one dental insurance
that can be utilized, a coordination of benefits must take
place. Which insurance is primary and which secondary
must be determined. Medicaid will almost always process
as secondary insurance.
When checking insurance benefits, ask what the coordination of benefits is for the plan. There are some
options: Nonduplication of Benefits, Birthday Rule, and
Biological Benefits. Send all claims out at UCR when the
patient has dual insurance.
The office is not obligated to submit secondary claims if
the doctor is not a provider with the secondary company.

Dental Insurance Fraud
Insurance fraud can result in criminal prosecution of the
dentist, even if he/she was not aware of how claims from
the office were being submitted by his/her staff. You can
submit only for completed procedures and only for the
fee that is charged to the patient.
The dentist should not discount or disregard the portion of fees not paid by an insurance company (i.e., the
patient’s co-payment). Doing so may constitute insurance fraud, because the dentist has misrepresented actual
charges. For example, if a fee for a procedure is $100 and
an insurance company pays only $80, do not submit a
claim for the full $100 fee if $80 has been accepted as payment in full. Submit the $100 claim only if the parent is
expected to pay the $20 that is not covered.

Different Types of Dental Insurance Programs
Most insurance companies provide some preventive and
basic coverage, but the insurance coverage depends on
the plan purchased by the employer or the individual.
Indemnity Plans
•	Indemnity plans are considered “fee for service” plans
where most of the UCR fee is covered. These plans
require filing claims and may require the patients to
accept assignment of benefits and receive payment
directly from the insurance, which means that they
will have to pay for all the services in your office in
full. The advantage of an indemnity plan is that the
policyholders are not typically restricted as to which
dental care providers they can use.
•	Almost all indemnity plans have a deductible.
Managed Care
•	Dental benefit organizations fit under the umbrella
term managed care, which is an insurance industry term
for a system that curbs expenditures in benefit plans by
cutting reimbursement levels and transferring financial
risk to those providing care (in this case, the dentist).

676

Chapter 31

n

Practice Management

•	In managed care, it is the payment methods rather
than the actual dental treatment modalities that
are different. Each managed care system has a specific mechanism of payment for treatment, usually
accompanied by some form of utilization review.
Dentists who participate in managed care organizations surrender control of their fees for that part of
their patient population enrolled in the managed care
organization.
•	The two most widely used types of dental managed
care are the preferred provider organization (PPO,
EPO, DPOs) and capitation contract dentistry (CCD,
HMO, DMO). A PPO is a network of private practitioners who contract with a plan to provide specific
services to a particular patient population at reduced
fees. Patients enrolled in a certain PPO must choose
a dentist from the organization’s list of providers.
In CCD plans the dentist contracts with a plan to
provide specific services to enrollees in return for
a monthly capitation amount, whether or not the
enrollees-patients actually make and keep appointments. In other words the dental office receives a
monthly lump capitation payment based on the
enrolled number of patients eligible for treatment in
that office.
•	Dentists must weigh many issues, options, and fiscal
matters regarding managed care. The ADA has a comprehensive array of resources to help dentists understand and analyze the positive and negative aspects of
managed care. Among the services offered is contract
analysis, which is available from the ADA through
individual state dental societies. Any dentist who is
considering signing a contract with a dental benefit
organization is well advised to consult with the ADA
and his or her own attorney, financial advisor, and
management consultant.
•	Being a managed care provider will help direct new
patients to the practice. However, the doctor will be
treating these patients at a fee schedule that is typically 20% to 60% lower than the doctor’s full fee.
This can be a good way to get new patients and start
cash flowing. It is better to make fifty cents on the
dollar than zero to help pay overhead costs when the
practice opens. A doctor can always decrease his/her
managed care involvement as the practice grows. The
fee discount of a PPO plan can be viewed as a marketing expense to bring in new patients.
Medicaid and Federally Funded Programs
•	These fees are typically 40% to 60% of a doctor’s full
fee.
•	Practitioners must decide how much dental service
their practice can provide for public assistance patients. The positive for doing so is the personal and
professional satisfaction of knowing that you, the
dentist, have cared for some of the neediest patients
in your community and have met some of your moral
and ethical obligations as a professional. The negative
for doing so is that many states’ program reimbursement levels fall short of covering the actual cost of
dentistry delivered to these patients. In this case the

dentist loses money on the services rendered to every
public assistance patient he or she treats. Some pediatric dentists solve this quandary by treating a limited
number of these patients by setting limits on the age
of patients they will treat, the age they “graduate”
from the practice, or the number of such patients
seen per day.
•	Medicaid (known by other titles in some states) is a
state-administered program in which each state sets
its own guidelines regarding eligibility and services,
including reimbursement rates. The wise practitioner
investigates his or her state program thoroughly before deciding to become a public assistance provider.
One might begin seeking information at a variety of
websites available through the U.S. Department of
Health and Human Services.

TREATMENT TRACKING
Treatment Plan Acceptance
Tracking diagnosed treatment on a daily basis has many
advantages. Patients who are seen today should always
have a future recare and/or restorative appointment.
When a patient leaves without a future appointment, extra time and money must be spent to bring that patient
back. By tracking who presented the cases and who assisted, the doctor can determine if there is a pattern for
which patients accept or do not accept treatment.

What to Track at the End of the Day
•	Number of patients who have another appointment
scheduled after today’s visit
•	Number of treatment plans diagnosed
•	Number of treatment plans scheduled
•	Number of treatment plans not scheduled; who presented the treatment plan and who assisted with the
patient. Training should be provided for treatment
acceptance.

Actions
•	Assign a staff member to stay in contact with the
parents who did not schedule restorative treatment,
to keep the importance of completing treatment fresh
in their minds.
•	Make the doctor aware of patients who did not
schedule their restorative treatment, especially if it is
a complex case or care has been neglected.
•	Determine if case acceptance is 75% or higher.

Unscheduled Treatment
Each software system will have reports for tracking unscheduled treatment.
  
1)	Once a month, run an unscheduled treatment
plan report with your software. Work to schedule
patients from this report regularly throughout the
month.
2)	Go through the report and delete any treatment that
is no longer necessary or has previously been completed. Often, if treatment changes from the original
treatment plan, the old treatment may possibly stay
on the report.

Chapter 31

3)	Contact parents to discuss the importance of
­returning for treatment. Communicate possible
conse­quences of not scheduling treatment and the
­advantages of completing treatment.
4)	Document all attempts to contact the parent.
5)	Document all conversations with the parents regarding a child’s past due treatment.
6)	Once the treatment diagnosis is 6 months old, schedule the patient to come back for continuing care.
7)	Make no more than three attempts by telephone
or text to contact the parent over the course of 2
months. If a parent does not respond and schedule
an appointment to complete treatment, send a letter
explaining the dental consequences of not completing treatment or not having periodic adjustments and
examination of an appliance or orthodontic treatment. Such letters should be mailed to the patient’s
last known address with a Certificate of Mailing (PS
Form 3817), which can be obtained from the U.S.
Postal Service. A copy of the letter should be kept
in the patient’s chart with the Certificate of Mailing
attached, to prove that the letter was mailed and that
the dentist’s professional responsibility was fulfilled.
A Certificate of Mailing adds nominal cost to firstclass postage.

Recare
The foundation of any successful dental practice is the
recare system. The recare system provides a constant
source of recare and restorative appointments that safeguards children’s oral health and emphasizes the fact that
the dentist and staff care a great deal about them. The
term recare is preferable to the frequently used word recall.
Re­care denotes ongoing, continuous attention, whereas recall suggests an occasional check for problems (e.g., the recall of an automobile for the replacement of faulty parts).
The most effective and efficient recare systems that
retain the most patients are those in which the next
recare appointment is scheduled 6 months in advance at
the conclusion of the present appointment. A reminder
postcard, e-mail, or text message should be sent 4 weeks
before the appointment. Dental software systems and
patient communication software are essential for helping to manage these messages. Run the unscheduled
recare report once a month with your software. Send reminders by text messages and/or postcards to patients
without appointments that are past due, now due, and
coming due. Place reminder phone calls to those who do
not respond.
There are two types of preappointed recare systems:
preselected and preassigned. When implementing either
system, the appointment secretary should emphasize to
parents and patients that the preappointed recare system
is for their convenience and is more likely to allow them
to choose an appointment 6 months hence at the time
that they prefer.
In preselected systems, at check-out, the parent ­chooses
the next recare appointment. In 5 months, a notification
with the day, date, and time is generated and mailed or an
e-mail message is sent.

n

Practice Management

677

In preassigned systems the patient is automatically
assigned a date and time for the next appointment. The
appointment may be at approximately the same time as
the present visit or it may alternate to be during or after
school. Again, in 5 months an appointment reminder is
sent by mail, e-mail, or text. This method is especially
helpful in a busy practice because it speeds the check-out
process.
For either a preselected or preassigned system, the appointment date is entered into the computer so that notifications can be generated when needed. If the recare
appointment must be changed for any reason, such as a
change in the dentist’s schedule, rescheduling should be
done by telephone.
On receipt of the recare card, parents who find the
time inconvenient usually call to reschedule. A confirmation telephone call should be made 2 days before the
appointment. The staff person calling to confirm should
be prepared to reschedule appointments if changes are requested.
Flexibility to accommodate appointment changes initiated by the office can be built into the preappointed
system by leaving 1 or 2 days unscheduled toward the
end of each month. If the time is not needed for changed
appointments, it may be booked 1 or 2 weeks ahead with
regular restorative appointments, new examinations, and
rescheduled appointments initiated by patients.

Checking Recare System Effectiveness
The recare program is the life-support system for any
practice. The recognized minimum goal is for at least 8
of 10 active patients to return regularly at the prescribed
frequency for hygiene appointments (i.e., 80% effectiveness). The effectiveness of the recare system should be
checked at least quarterly.
Accuracy of the check depends on a close count of
patients who have been seen in the previous 18 months
(active patients), except those whose treatments could
be classified as single-visit emergencies (Clinical Dental
Terminology [CDT] code No. DO140) and who are not
enrolled as regular patients.
The following example illustrates a quick, easy way to
check the effectiveness of a recare system:
  
•	4000 active patients ÷ 6 months (recare frequency) =
667 recare appointments per month for a 100% effective system
•	Actual average for 3 months = 300 recare appointments per month
•	300 actual ÷ 667 potential = a 45% effective system
•	Goal = 80% or more of active patients returning for
regular recare appointments
•	4000 active patients × 0.80 = 3200 patients
•	3200 patients ÷ 6 months (recare frequency) = 533
recare appointments per month as 80% goal
•	(533 recares per month as 80% goal = 300 recares per
month actual average) = 233 additional recares per
month
•	233 × $155 average recare fee (child with and without
BWX and fluoride) = $36,115 per month increased
production

678

Chapter 31

n

Practice Management

•	$36,115 per month production × 12 months =
$433,380 of additional income generated from
­current patients—plus better care and service to
­patients
  
After the current effectiveness rate is determined,
the dentist and staff can work toward the goal of 80%
of active patients returning regularly for recare. Problems with the system should be listed and analyzed,
and ways to improve the system must be planned and
implemented. Many practitioners find that 60% or
more of restorative and orthodontic treatment needs
is diagnosed during hygiene examinations, which reinforces the importance of an effective recare system in
any office.

Purging Charts and Reactivating Patients
It is important to purge patients’ charts at least once a
year, preferably in September or October. As defined by
the American Dental Association, an active dental patient of record is any individual in either of the following
two categories: Category I - patients of record who have
had dental service(s) provided by the dentist in the past
twelve (12) months; or Category II - patients of record
who have had dental service(s) provided by the dentist in
the past twenty-four (24) months, but not within the past
twelve (12) months. An inactive patient is any individual
who has become a patient of record and has not received
any dental services(s) by the dentists in the past twentyfour (24) months.
The appointment secretary can run a report of patients who have not been seen during that year and telephone or e-mail the parents to stress the importance of
regular hygiene appointments. Parents of children with
incomplete treatment should be informed of the treatment yet to be rendered and the importance of completing it. Parents with dental insurance should be reminded
that benefits for that year will be lost unless they schedule an appointment for their child before year’s end.
Many people will schedule an appointment to avoid
losing insurance benefits. Individuals who refuse to reschedule should be contacted once more, and so noted
in the patient chart, before their charts are placed in the
inactive file. It costs the practice five times as much to
attract a new patient as it does to keep an existing one.
Practices need to invest time and effort in patient retention and reactivation.
Some state laws specify a minimum period after the
last treatment date that dental records must be maintained. Regardless of the statutory requirement, it is best
to maintain records for as long as possible but certainly
no less than 10 years from the last treatment date for
adults and up to age 28 for patients treated when they
were children. Charts should be kept as evidence against
malpractice claims and to answer medical or dental questions that may arise in later years. If storage becomes a
problem, records can be scanned into digital files. Such
records are admissible in most state courts. Of course, a
proper backup system for storage of inactive charts must
be maintained if the office has only computerized charts.
For additional information regarding patient records,
visit: http://www.ada.org/sections/professionalResources/

pdfs/dentalpractice_dental_records.pdf. Steps for reactivation
   include:
•	Print a list of patients who have not been seen for 12
or 18 months.
•	Document all efforts to contact the parent.
•	Place phone calls during times when you expect the
phone to be answered.
•	Leave a message: “I am calling about your child’s dental health.”
•	Follow up the phone message with an e-mail if the
call is not returned.
•	Send letters via U.S. mail only after all other attempts
have been unproductive.
•	If at any time during this process the parent states
that the family has gone elsewhere for dental treatment, ask if there was anything that your office could
have done differently, since you are striving to provide excellent customer service. Document reasons for
their voluntary release from the practice in their ledger, and let the patients know that you will welcome
them back into the office at any time.
•	Once a patient has gone more than 24 months without an appointment or the contact information is no
longer valid, the patient should be placed on inactive
status.

INTERNAL AND EXTERNAL MARKETING
Parents “buy” three “products” in a pediatric dental
“store”: procedures and information to help prevent dental disease, procedures to treat dental disease, and the
dental team. There are two avenues through which these
products are marketed: internal and external marketing.
The extent as to where and how external marketing activities will occur depends on the doctor’s desire and the
available mix of full-fee, PPO, and Medicaid patients for
the practice.
The doctor should create a marketing team that will
oversee and carry out internal and external marketing efforts 12 months a year to ensure a continuous stream of
new patients. The goal is to build a “marketing machine”
of regularly repeated activities that results in an increased
awareness of the importance of all children having a dental home by age 1 and what a pediatric dentist can offer
to infants and children vs. a general dentist. Marketing
expenses should be built into the budget and should be
1% to 5%, depending on the number of unfilled appointments in the schedule. New patients should be counted
by CDT code 0150 Comprehensive Exam, and a doctor
who sees patients 4 days a week should strive for 55 to 75
new patients per month, depending on the level of decay
in the community.

Practice Branding, Website, and Social Media
•	Practice branding should reflect the identity of the
practice. A logo starts the branding process and
should be carried out in all things related to the practice: office décor, uniforms, business cards, stationery,
note cards, referral forms, website, Facebook page, etc.
It is important that the branding be easily recognizable by parents and communicates that the practice
delivers specialized dentistry for children.

Chapter 31

n

Practice Management

679

Monthly Marketing Meeting

Dental Team

•	Hold a monthly marketing meeting between the
doctor and staff members who are assigned to the
marketing team and are responsible for executing
marketing actions. This meeting creates your monthly
marketing action plan.
•	Each month, print a new-patient referral report and
examine it to determine the following:
•	Who is referring—parents, pediatricians, general
dentists, or obstetricians?
•	How should they be acknowledged?
•	What marketing actions are working? What are not?
•	What new marketing actions should be carried out
in the next month?
•	Thank referral sources
•	All referral sources should be acknowledged with
appreciation. (Always check your state’s Dental
Practice Act to be sure you are in compliance. Some
states do not allow a referral gift to be given.)
•	Parents can be thanked with a handwritten note
and a $5 gift card.
•	Health care offices can be thanked with a box of
treats or a variety of small gifts for staff members.
These can be dropped off monthly, bimonthly, or
quarterly, depending upon the number of referrals
sent.

Parents typically have a choice of pediatric dental practices where they can seek treatment for their child. Most
often their choice is based on who will be providing the
care. Parents must Trust, Like, and have Confidence in
the team before they will “buy” a treatment plan; therefore the most important “product” in the dental office is
the team that provides the TLC. Each staff member is just
as important a “product” as the doctor. A great doctor can
be tarnished by a front desk staff member who is rude or a
clinical
   staff member who is rough and insensitive.
•	The appearance of the team should reflect excellence; uniforms should look clean and crisp.
•	Staff hair, makeup, and jewelry should be
­appropriate.
•	Use good eye contact, smile as you shake the parent’s hand, and introduce yourself along with your
position in the office.
•	Ask the parent and child about themselves, their
dental concerns, interests, hobbies, sports. Show
genuine interest in them.
•	Find something on which to compliment them.
Make them feel good about themselves.
•	Listen well. Do not interrupt. Be empathetic,
friendly, and polite.
•	Laugh and have fun. People remember how you
make them feel more than what you say.
•	Make a personal note about the child and date it in
the chart so this topic can be discussed at the next
visit by anyone in the office.
•	Review the personal notes before seeing the child.
•	Send handwritten personal notes/cards to patients
to welcome them to the practice or compliment
them on being a good patient. Have a pleasant and
educational “on hold” message.
•	Ask for referrals. After a parent compliments the
practice, say, “Thank you for appreciating what we
do here. We are always welcoming new patients to
the practice. If you know any families who would
also enjoy this type of practice for their children,
please tell them about us. We would enjoy helping
them.”
•	Offer more flexible financial options for payment.
•	Become a preferred provider on higher-paying
insurance plans.
•	Increase the number of new Medicaid patients to
fill open time.

Internal Marketing
Internal marketing involves activities within the office
that are focused on exceeding expectations and creating loyal relationships with the parent and child so they
will come in for regular preventive appointments, accept
treatment plans, and refer friends and family. Existing
families should be your biggest referral source, due to
your excellent customer service.

Prevention of Dental Disease
•	Provide as much patient education as possible! The
amount of patient education a parent/patient receives
makes the difference between a “satisfied” parent/patient and a “highly satisfied” parent/patient. Parents
are willing to pay more for services when they feel
they have also received excellent preventive and postoperative education.
•	Educate the caregiver on how to prevent and reduce
early childhood caries (ECC) through providing information about proper brushing and flossing, healthy
diet and snacks, fluoride, and preventive visits.
•	Provide educational materials
•	Give written material to the parent that reinforces
caries prevention, Oral Hygiene Instructions, and/
or postoperative instructions.
•	Have pictures and models of the different dental
procedures so parents can better understand what
is being recommended and how it will benefit their
child.
•	Utilize technology to educate caregivers. The Baby
Infant Oral Health Program website is an excellent
resource that educates caregivers, team members,
and expectant mothers about the prevention of
ECC: http://www.babyoralhealthprogram.org/.

Facility
•	The appearance of the facility should reflect excellence. Parents judge the quality of your clinical
excellence on everything they see, touch, and
hear. If the office looks out of date and shabby,
with stained carpet and paint-chipped walls, then
parents will think that the clinical dentistry is
behind the times and of poor quality and will have
concerns about infection control.
•	Create a good flow for check-in and check-out so
that bottlenecks do not occur. Typically there is
one check-in station and two check-out stations,
separated for private financial conversations.

680

Chapter 31

n

Practice Management

•	Create a comfortable area for parents, play areas
with electronic games and special toys for young
patients, and perhaps a separate area for teenage
patients.
•	Keep the facility up to date by redecorating every 5
years.

External Marketing
External marketing involves activities outside of the office to create an awareness of and need for your services.
The AAPD has created a number of marketing programs
for use by its members that can be found on the AAPD
website.

Marketing to Health Care Professionals
•	Pediatricians should be your second top referral
source after parents of existing patients. Other
referring health care professionals are general practitioner physicians, general practitioner dentists,
obstetricians, and school nurses.
•	Educate health care professionals and their staffs
about the importance of a child having a dental
home by age one and what a pediatric dentist can
offer. This can be done by offering to conduct
“lunch and learn” sessions in their office. Be aware
that it is not just the physician who refers; parents
ask nurses and front desk staff where to take their
child for dental care. Therefore it is just as important to educate the staff of referring offices as well
as the physician.

Dental Health Education Programs
Dental health education programs are a wonderful way
to speak directly to children. They can be scheduled in
public and private schools, day care centers and homes,
vacation Bible schools, and summer day camps. Alternatively, the above groups can be invited to your office for a
field trip. Follow the tips below:
  
•	The program will be more memorable if you include
a staff member dressed as a tooth fairy, mascot,
super hero, or popular fictional movie character.
The costumed character you choose should become
part of your practice “branding.” Have a picture of
your mascot on your website and in your reception
room.
•	Make your program interactive with the children.
The more children interact with the information you
share, the more they will remember.
•	Include a letter to the parents in the child’s goody
bag that has the following information: who you
are, information about the presentation, what the
child learned, information about ECC, and a “call to
action” about the importance of having preventive
visits and a dental home by age one.
•	Your mascot can also be in a booth at health fairs,
especially health fairs for expectant mothers and
mothers of newborns.

Website and Social Media
•	Most parents now use the Internet or a mobile ­device
to search for a children’s dentist instead of the

­ ellow Pages in the phone book. Make your website
Y
­mobile-optimized and own multiple domain names
that parents might use to find you/your practice
name.
•	Utilize a reputation management company that can
also boost your search engine optimization to help
you stay competitive.
•	Set up your Google Places Page with information
that exactly matches what is on your website name,
phone, and address. Google Maps gets its information
from your Google Places Page.

User-Friendly Website
•	Meet the dentist: video clip of the doctor introducing
him/herself and talking about his/her practice philosophy. Discuss your practice’s unique qualities and
why families love you.
•	Meet the team: video clip of staff members talking
about the practice and why they like working there.
•	Testimonials: video clip of satisfied parents and patients.
•	Include pictures of your office.
•	Provide your location, including a Google Maps link.
•	List the insurance plans with which you have contracts.
•	Get information on dental topics.
•	Be able to fill out New Patient Information forms online.

Social Media
Social media are an inexpensive way to help maintain relationships and foster loyalty with your current patient
base. They can also greatly expand your reach to new patients. There are several choices of social media to promote your practice:
  
•	Facebook—the “social” connection with families
when they are not in your office.
•	LinkedIn—the “professional” connection with colleagues and other business people.
•	Blogging—the “educational” connection for you
to share your professional knowledge and current
thoughts regarding topics in the industry.
•	Twitter—the “real time” connection. Ongoing discussion in real time.
•	Pinterest— the “social bookmarking” site where users
collect and share photos of their favorite events, interests, and hobbies.
•	Manage your online reputation by interacting with
parents/patients as you see fit and posting information that you feel is important.
•	Have policies in your Employee Policy Manual related
to social media that address the following issues:
•	Use of practice equipment and services
•	Protection of confidential and proprietary information
•	Protection of patient information
•	Use of the Internet to harass co-workers
•	Prohibition against criticizing patients and
­vendors
•	Ensure that staff members understand the detrimental
effects of negative comments about their workplace
on social media sites. There is little privacy on the
Internet.

Chapter 31

•	Monitor doctor rating sites by setting up a Google
Alert account at www.Google.com/alert. Plan dedicated staff and doctor time to sustain a consistent
presence and monitor content. Set aside 10 minutes a
day to update and review your social media sites.

DENTAL OFFICE TECHNOLOGY
Dental offices are increasingly using technology because it is efficient, because parents like the convenience, and because practice management software systems are vital and give the doctor and OM good business
  information.
•	Basic technology for the front desk includes: ­dental
practice management software system, patient
­communication software, scanners, printers, multiple
computers, and multi-line phone systems. Invest in
a software system that allows for electronic statements and electronic claims submission and clinical
­charting.
•	Regular cloud and mirror backup systems are imperative to ensure that data are not lost.
•	Limits to staff access levels in the systems need to be
adjusted to avoid changes in settings.
•	Chartless offices require the use of scanners and
digital radiography; they are also more efficient and
cost-effective.
•	Advanced technology for clinical teams would
include Isolight, Diagnodent, Digital Radiography,
Waterlase, and much more.

COMPLIANCE
Pediatric dental practices should make compliance standards a top priority and must provide training to the staff
to ensure that compliance standards are followed and
that mandatory forms are signed by each parent or guardian. The main categories for compliance standards are as
follows:
  
1.	Infection control—Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention: Sterilization processes and routine sporetesting.
http://www.cdc.gov/oralhealth/infectioncontrol/
guidelines/index.htm10
2.	HIPAA Compliance: HIPAA Privacy Rule gives patients
some rights over their dental records, billing ledgers,
and other health information.
http://www.ada.org/8753.aspx and http://hipaanews
.org/checklist.htm11
3.	Patient Records Compliance: Check your state’s
Dental Practice Act for information on record-keeping
requirements in your state.
http://www.ada.org/sections/professionalResources/
pdfs/dentalpractice_dental_records.pdf 9
4.	OSHA Compliance: Follow all OSHA and state regulations. Maintain records of all training and all required
documentation, including sports testing, sharps
disposal, as well as CPR training.
https://www.osha.gov/Publications/OSHA3187/osha
3187.html12
5.	Many states require that labor laws be posted. Additional postings specifically for the dental office may be
required in your state, such as pay date postings, what

n

Practice Management

681

to do in case of injury on the job, etc. Check with
your state Labor Board for compliance requirements.
6.	Be sure that you are in compliance with parents’ signing informed consents for treatment. The AAPD website, www.aapd.org, has information on guidelines for
Informed Consents.
7.	Keep your credentials current.
•	Declarations pages from the insurance companies,
CPR cards, DEA license, dental license, and certifications all must be kept current, and there are
penalties if these expire.
8.	Stay compliant with insurance company contracts.
•	Insurance companies often send reminders for
updated paperwork.
•	Immediately update any doctor provider changes
for credentialing with contracted insurance companies. Insurance companies will not pay for work
performed by a doctor who is not credentialed.

CLINICAL ORGANIZATION
•	Clinical supplies stored in cabinets and carts should
be identical in each room so that materials can be
found quickly; this ensures efficiency.
•	It is less expensive to maintain and service equipment
than to replace it. Review all service manuals and follow
the manufacturer’s recommendations for service. Place
notes on the schedule when service is due and document all service in a maintenance logbook (Fig. 31-11).
•	Ensure that handpieces are oiled and maintained according to the recommendations.

INVENTORY CONTROL
A well-organized inventory system will keep you from
running out of necessary supplies and materials or being
oversupplied and thus tying up excess cash.
  
•	Create a list of all the materials used in the office
and where these supplies are ordered. All items
that are used in the practice should be assessed
once a year, catalogued, and included in the
systems manual.
•	Work with your dental supply company to create a
barcode scanner or a tag system for reordering supplies. Inventory control involves communication
among all team members; it is not one person’s responsibility to report supplies that are running low.
•	Store dental materials in ideal conditions. Failure
to store products as per the manufacturer’s recommended conditions may lead to having to throw out
materials and/or procedure failures/redos.
•	A front desk staff member should be in charge of
front office supplies, and a dental assistant should be
in charge of clinical supplies.
•	Each should work within the practice’s monthly front
office and clinical supply budget. Ask for the best
deals possible and keep a log of supply orders.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
I am grateful to Lilly Cortes-Pona and Brenda McNulty
for their excellent contributions of practice management
knowledge in this chapter.

682

Chapter 31

n

Practice Management

Clinical Maintenance Checklist
Daily
Compressors turned on AM off PM
Turn water lines on AM off PM
Open nitrous and O2 tanks
Refill water bottles on all units
Clean out/change as needed vacuum traps
and run vacuum system cleaner through all
lines
Weekly
Spore test sterilizer
Check traps on all dental units
Lubricate vacuum valves
Wipe down light reflectors and shields
Empty and clean out water bottles on all units
Monthly
If using plaster trap clean and check
Lubricate joints on equipment
Quarterly
Check filters on compressor
Check and/or change compressor oil
Clean model trimmer wheel
Check hydraulic fluid on the chairs
Check smoke alarms

Turn vacuum on AM off PM
Check fluid levels in sterilizer—always before
a cycle
Fill ultrasonic/drain at end of the day
Back up computer hard drives
Purge water lines by blowing air through
them at the end of the night

Clean outside and inside of the sterilizer
Check o-rings for wear and replace as needed
Clean ultrasonic
Check oil on oil-lubricated compressors and
drain compressor tank
Clean out boiling chamber of water
distiller
Check AED battery and emergency supplies
such as med kit
Check all filters
Check filter on vacuum
Check tubing on the units and N20
Check traps on model trimmer and drain lines
Check battery backup systems on all
computers
Verify computer backup

Yearly
At least yearly change the oil in the
compressor
Conduct staff OSHA training
Check for worn cords
Conduct emergency drills
Have x-ray equipment inspected, calibrated,
and certified

Change sterilizer gaskets
CPR (every 2 years if AHA)
Check equipment for leaks
Check AED for expired pads or battery

LOGBOOKS:
A sample clinical area logbook should include:
X-ray calibration and recertification of
equipment logbook
Sharps and red bag contaminates disposal
log
MSDS logbook
Staff training logbook
Oil changing in the compressor log

Fire extinguisher replenishment and fire
inspections logbook
Spore testing and documentation of
sterilization equipment maintenance log
Dosimeter results log
Water line testing log
Other state required mandated logs

Figure 31-11 Clinical maintenance checklist.

REFERENCES
1.	Collins J: Good to great, New York, NY, 2001, William Collins.
2.	Parker JF: Do the right thing, Upper Saddle River, NJ, 2008,
Pearson Education Inc.
3.	
The Rule of 72: double your money, reduce your debt. Available
at: http://ruleof72.org/.
4.	Kouzes JM, Posner BW: The leadership challenge, San ­Francisco,
1995, Jossey-Bass Inc.
5.	American Dental Association. Member Services. Available at:
http://www.ada.org; by telephone 1-800-947-4746; or reference librarians at the ADA Library, 312-440-2653.
6.	Professional DynaMetric Programs (PDP), www.pdpglobal.com.

7.	Blanchard K, Johnson S: The one minute manager, New York,
2003, Harper Collins.
8.	CDT: Dental Procedure Codes, http://ebusiness.ada.org/, 2014.
9.	
American Dental Association Council on Dental Practice, http
://www.ada.org/sections/professionalResources/pdfs/dental
practice_dental_records.pdf, 2007.
10.	Centers for Disease Control and Prevention: http://www.cdc
.gov/oralhealth/infectioncontrol/guidelines/index.htm.
11.	U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. HIPAA Privacy Regulations. Available at: http://www.os.dhhs.gov/ocr/
hipaa.
12.	Occupational Safety and Health Administration: https://www.
osha.gov/Publications/OSHA3187/osha3187.html.

INDEX
A

AAPD. see American Academy of Pediatric
Dentistry (AAPD)
ABO. see American Board of Orthodontics
(ABO)
Abortion, spontaneous, 90–91
Abscess, alveolar, 40, 40f–41f
after pulp therapy, 239
Absolute neutrophil count (ANC), 557
Abuse. see Child abuse and neglect
Acatalasia, 48
Accounts payable. see Practice
management
Acetaminophen, for postoperative pain,
284t
Achondroplastic dwarfism, eruption of
teeth and, 368, 371f
Acid-etch technique, 212, 213f
Acquired and developmental
disturbances, of teeth, 39–79
agenesis of teeth, 61–64
anodontia, 61–62, 62f
ectodermal dysplasias, 64, 65f–66f
hypodontia, 62–63
and cancer, 63–64
and palatally displaced canines,
63
alveolar abscess, 40, 40f–41f
amelogenesis imperfecta, 59–61, 60f
cellulitis, 40–41, 41f
dentin defects, 56–59
dentinogenesis imperfecta, 56–59,
56f–58f
dysplasia, 59
early exfoliation, 43–48
acrodynia, 48
cherubism (familial fibrous
dysplasia), 45–48, 46f–47f
cyclic neutropenia (cyclic
hematopoiesis), 48
hypophosphatasia, 44–45
hypophosphatemia, 48
enamel and dentin aplasia, 61, 61f
enamel hypoplasia, 49–54, 49f
allergies and, 50–51
from brain injury and neurologic
defects, 50
cleft lip and palate and, 51
fluoride and, 53–54
ionizing radiation and
chemotherapy, 52, 53f
lead poisoning (plumbism) and, 51
local infection and trauma, 51,
51f–52f
microabrasion and, 54, 54f
molar-incisor hypomineralization
and, 52–53
nephrotic syndrome and, 50

Acquired and developmental
disturbances, of teeth (Continued)
from nutritional deficiencies, 49–50,
50f
from rubella embryopathy, 52, 53f
treatment of, 53
labial frenum, abnormal, 73–74,
73f–74f
frenectomy, 73–74, 74f–75f
micrognathia, 68–69, 69f
pigmentation of teeth, 65–68
bleaching of intrinsic tooth, 68, 68f
in cystic fibrosis, 67
in hyperbilirubinemia, 65–66, 67f
in porphyria, 66–67
in tetracycline therapy, 67–68, 67f
pre-eruptive “caries,” 54–56, 54f–55f
taurodontism, 56, 56f
teeth anomalies, 41–43
dens invaginatus (dens in dente), 43,
44f–45f
fusion of teeth, 42, 43f
gemination, 42–43, 43f
odontoma, 41, 42f
tongue anomalies, 69–73
ankyloglossia, 70, 70f
black hairy tongue, 72, 72f
coated tongue, 71–72, 72f
fissured tongue and geographic
tongue, 71, 71f
indentation of margin, 72
macroglossia, 70
median rhomboid glossitis, 72
trauma, tongue piercing,
72–73, 73f
white strawberry tongue, 72
Acquired immunodeficiency syndrome
(AIDS), 549–551
Acrodynia, 48
and periodontitis, 259
Active listening, 298
Acyanotic congenital heart disease, 536
Acyclovir (Zovirax), for herpes simplex
virus infection, 246–247
ADA. see American Dental Association
(ADA)
“Addictive” foods, 152
Adenomatoid odontogenic tumor,
616–617, 616f
Adhesives, dental, 212–214
Adolescents
dental caries. see Caries, dental
diet sodas and sports/energy drinks for,
151
healthy eating in, 150
home oral hygiene for, 135
meal replacement shakes and
smoothies for, 151

Adolescents (Continued)
occlusion, development of. see
Occlusion, developing
pain control. see Anesthesia, local,
and pain control for child and
adolescent
prosthodontic treatment of. see
Prosthodontic treatment of
adolescent patient
substance abuse, 14
Aesthetics
facial, 408–414, 409f
frontal view, 409–411, 409f–412f
profile view, 411–414, 412f–413f
orthodontics for, 467–468
Agranulocytosis, and periodontitis, 259
AIDS. see Acquired immunodeficiency
syndrome (AIDS)
Airway management, in sedation,
319–320, 320f
Airway obstruction, in cleft lip and
palate, 488, 488f
Albright hereditary osteodystrophy,
368–372
Alginate impression, 485
Alleles, 92
Allergies
and enamel hypoplasia, 50–51
and gingivitis, 245
Alloys
high-copper, 215
and mercury ratio, 215
selection of, 215
Amalgam, 214–218
in bonded restorations, 217
in marginal breakdown and bulk
fracture, 216–217, 216f
in restorative dentistry, 191, 192f
silver, in restorations, 186
Amalgamators, mechanical, 216, 216f
Ameloblastoma, 615–616
Amelogenesis. see Enamel, hypoplasia
Amelogenesis imperfecta, 59–61, 60f, 95
American Academy of Child and
Adolescent Psychiatry, 14
American Academy of Pediatric Dentistry
(AAPD)
alternative restorative treatment,
201–202
anesthesia guidelines, 671
Behavior Guidance for the Pediatric Dental
Patient Reference Manual 2014-15,
520
behavior management, 286
caries risk assessment, 163–164,
164t–165t
in cleft lip and palate, 489–490
early childhood caries, 158

Note: Page numbers followed by “b”, “f” and “t” indicate boxes, figures and tables respectively.

683

684

Index

American Academy of Pediatric Dentistry
(Continued)
gingivitis and periodontal disease,
243
guidelines for
pediatric care, 2t
in performing moderate sedation,
325
pit and fissure sealants, 178
preoperative dietary instructions, 322
special health care needs, 513
American Association of Oral and
Maxillofacial Surgeons, 632
American Board of Orthodontics (ABO),
467
American Board of Pediatric Dentistry,
parenting styles and dental practice,
294
American Cleft Palate-Craniofacial
Association, 480, 489
American Dental Association (ADA)
pit and fissure sealants, 178
Toothbrush Acceptance Program
Guidelines of, 125
American Journal of Orthodontics, 468
American Society of Anesthesiologists,
physical status classification system,
321, 321b
Americans with Disabilities Act, 514
Amicar, 544
ε-Aminocaproic acid, 544
Amoxicillin, for periodontitis, 258–259
Analgesia, for hemophilia, 545
Analgesics, 284, 284t
Analog film, 20–21
direct, 20, 20t
indirect, 20–21, 20f
Anesthesia
continuum of, 303–305, 304f
general
see also Hospital dental services
topical fluorides in, 169–170
local, and pain control for child and
adolescent, 274–285
complications after, 282–283
toxicity, 282–283, 283t
trauma to soft tissue, 283, 283f
by conventional injection, 275
dental anesthesia
analgesics, 284, 284t
reversal of, 283–284
for hemophilia, 545
jet injection, 275
of mandibular teeth and soft tissue,
275–277
conduction anesthesia (Gow-Gates
mandibular block technique),
277, 277f
conventional mandibular block,
275–276, 276f
infiltration anesthesia, for
mandibular primary molars,
276–277
infiltration for mandibular
incisors, 277
lingual nerve block, 276
long buccal nerve block, 276, 276f

Anesthesia (Continued)
maxillary permanent molars,
279–280
maxillary primary and permanent
incisors and canines, 278
local infiltration (supraperiosteal
technique), 278, 278f
maxillary primary molars and
premolars, 278–279, 279f
palatal tissues, 280
greater (anterior) palatine
injection, 280, 280f–281f
nasopalatine nerve block, 280,
280f
supplemental injection techniques,
281–282
computer-controlled local
anesthetic delivery system, 282
infraorbital nerve block, 281
intraosseous, interseptal, and
intrapulpal injections, 282
mental nerve block, 281
periodontal ligament injection,
281–282
topical anesthetics, 274–275
local, sedation and, 318, 318f–319f
Aneuploidy, 91t
Angles of growth. see Cephalometrics
Angular cheilitis, 550
Anhidrotic ectodermal dysplasia, 64
Ankyloglossia (tongue-tie), 70, 70f
Ankylosis, 582–584
see also Tooth (teeth), ankylosed
Anodontia, 61–62, 62f
Anorexia nervosa, 148–149
Anterior mandibular occlusal technique,
in bitewing radiography, 27, 30f
Anterior maxillary occlusal technique, in
bitewing radiography, 26, 28f–29f
Anterior nasal spine, 394
Antibiotic, prophylaxis, in hemophilia, 547
Anticipatory guidance, 1
Antidiuretic hormone, 542–543
Antifibrinolytic agents, for hemophilia,
544–545
dosages of, 544–545
side effects of, 545
Antihistamines, for sedation, 310–311
diphenhydramine (Benadryl), 311
hydroxyzine (Atarax, Vistaril), 310
promethazine (Phenergan), 310–311
Antiseptic agents, for plaque control,
129–132, 130f–131f
Antiviral medication, for herpes simplex
virus infection, 246–247
Anxiety
dental, 291
parental, 292
Apert syndrome, 96
Apexification, 573–576, 575f, 577f
Aphthasol, 249
Aphthous ulcer, recurrent, 248
A point, in cephalometrics, 394
Appliances, dental
and caries, 162
in cleft lip and palate, 484–490
for early tooth loss, 422–423

Appointments. see Practice management
Apposition, 81, 81f
Arch, teeth arrangement in, 162
Aromatase, 103
Articaine, 277
Articulare, 394
Ascorbic acid deficiency gingivitis, 256,
256f
ASD. see Autism spectrum disorder (ASD)
Asthma, 531–532
Astringedent, 234
Asymmetric tonic neck reflex, 530
Atraumatic Restorative Treatment (ART),
201
Attending, 298
Attitude, in dental team, 296
Audiologist, in cleft lip and palate, 484
Autism spectrum disorder (ASD), 528–529
Autograft, free gingival, 266–268,
267f–268f
Autoimmune disorders, 551
Autosomal-dominant inheritance, 93, 93f
Autosomal-recessive inheritance, 93–94,
94f
Autosomes, 90
Aversive conditioning, 299–300
Avulsion, of injured tooth, 588–593,
589f–590f
treatment of, 594b–595b
Awareness, of dental problem, 292
Azidothymidine (AZT), 550

B

Bacterial infections, in HIV infection, 551
Basic life support (BLS), 640
Basion, 394
Basion-nasion plane, 395
Battered child syndrome, 110
Beanbag dental chair insert, 522, 524f
Behavior
in child abuse, 113
nonpharmacologic management of,
286–302
age-related psychological traits and
skills, 287b
parents, 294
pediatric dental patients, 286–294
cooperative behavior classification
in, 292–293
developmental milestones in, 287,
288t–290t
functional inquiry in, 293–294,
293b
general problems with, 292
intellectual development in, 291
medical experiences, 292
parental anxiety, 292
questionnaire in, 293
toxic stress, 292
treatment triangle, 286, 287f
variables influencing, 291–292
pharmacologic management of,
303–327, 304f
anatomic and physiologic differences
in, 305–306
airway, 306, 306f
body size and composition, 306

Index

Behavior (Continued)
cardiovascular system, 305–306,
306t
central nervous system, 305
respiratory system, 306
definition of, 303–305
documentation of, 320–321
drugs and agents used for sedation,
309
antihistamines, 310–311
benzodiazepine agonists and
antagonists, 311–312
hypnotics, 313–314
nitrous oxide, 309–310, 314–316
opioid agonists and antagonists,
312–313
facilities and equipment for, 319–320
fundamental concepts of, 305–314
monitoring of, 322–324, 323f–324f
intraoperative, 322–324
postoperative, 324
patient selection and preparation in,
321–322
indications for, 321
informed consent, 321–322
instructions to parents in, 322
preoperative evaluation of, 321
routes of drug administration,
305–306, 308f
enteral, 307
inhalational, 307, 318
intramuscular, 307
intravenous, 307–308
rectal, 309
submucosal and subcutaneous,
307
sedation, 303, 304f
combination of methods and
agents in, 318–319
continuum of, 303–305, 304f
intravenous, 305
oral, 305, 318–319
strategies of dental team, 294–301
aversive conditioning in, 299–300
behavior shaping in, 298–299, 299f
communicating with children in,
297–298
guidance of child, 295–297
limitations in, 301
parent-child separation in, 300–301
preappointment behavior
modification, 295, 296f
reinforcements, tangible, 301
retraining in, 299
scheduling in, 300
Benadryl, for herpes simplex virus
infection, 246
Benzodiazepine agonists and antagonists,
for sedation, 311–312
diazepam (Valium), 311, 318
flumazenil (Romazicon), 312
midazolam (Versed), 311–312
Bethesda units (BU), 543–544
Binge-eating disorder, 150
Biofilm, infection control in dental
office, 16
Biostatistics, 646

Bisecting angle technique, in periapical
radiography, 23, 26f
Bisphenol A-glycidyldimethacrylate
(bis-GMA) resin, 208
Bisphosphonate, eruption of teeth and,
372
Bite block, 627–628, 628f
Bite marks, in child abuse, 115–116, 115f
Bitewing radiography, 23–27, 27f
Black hairy tongue, 72, 72f
Bleaching, of intrinsic tooth
discoloration, 68, 68f
Bleeding disorders. see Hemophilia
Blindness, 534
Bloch-Sulzberger syndrome, 368–372
BLS. see Basic life support (BLS)
Bluegrass appliance, 440, 441f
Blue light-emitting diodes, 210–211
Blunderbuss canal, 572
BMI. see Body mass index (BMI)
Board certification competencies, 650b
Body mass index (BMI)
obesity and, 145
standards for children, 146t
Bohn nodules, 356–357
Bone
benign tumors of. see Tumors, benign,
of bone
endochondral formation of, 378
freeze-dried, for pulp capping, 235
lesions in leukemia, 555
on nonerupted tooth, 422
Bone grafting, of alveolar cleft defects,
488–489
primary, 489
secondary, 490–493, 494f–496f
Bone marrow transplantation, 558–559
Bottle feeding, dental caries and, 158
B point, in cephalometrics, 394
Brachyfacial pattern, 404, 405f
Brain injury, and enamel hypoplasia, 50
Brain tumors, 560
Brass ligature, for ectopic eruption, 456
Breakfast, nutritious, 150
Bronchopulmonary dysplasia, 532
Bruises, in child abuse, 112–115
Bruxism, 435, 437f
in cerebral palsy, 530
BU. see Bethesda units (BU)
Bulimia, 149–150
Burns
in child abuse, 112–113, 113f
oral
management of, 596–600, 598f–600f
nature of injury, 597, 597f
Butacaine sulfate, in pain control, 275

C

Calcification, of teeth, 81, 349, 350t
of anterior primary teeth, 81
dystrophic, 580–581, 580f–581f
of posterior teeth and first permanent
molar, 81–82
Calcium, dietary, 144
Calcium hydroxide
liner, in pulp therapy, 224–226
pulpotomy, 572

685

Calcium phosphate ceramics, for pulp
capping, 235
Calculus, 271–272
Caloric intake, 140
Cancer
and hypodontia, 63–64
obesity and, 145
Candida albicans, 550
Candidiasis
acute, 250, 250f
in leukemia, 557–558
Candidosis, 250, 250f
Canines
eruption guidance for, 459–461, 460f
congenitally missing teeth in,
464–467, 466f
diastemas in, 462, 463f
supernumerary teeth in, 462–464,
463f–465f
mandibular, 83
maxillary, 82
impacted, 635
palatally displaced, and hypodontia, 63
primary, early loss of, 424–425, 426f
primary and permanent, anesthesia
for, 278
Canker sore, 248–249, 248f
Capitation contract dentistry (CCD), 676
Capnography, 323–324, 325f
Capping materials, 233–236
calcium hydroxide, 233–234, 234f
dentin-bonding agents, 235
ferric sulfate, 234–235
formalin, 234, 235f
mineral trioxide aggregate, 235
summary of, 236, 237f, 237t
zinc oxide-eugenol, 233
Carbohydrates, fermentable, 165–166
Caries, dental
activity tests for, 172
anatomic characteristics of teeth and,
162
antimicrobial agents for, 166–171
chlorhexidine, 172
povidone-iodine, 172
thymol, 172
xylitol, 172
appliances and restorations presence
and, 162
bottle feeding and, 158
in cerebral palsy, 530
control of, 164–171
active lesions, 164–165
dentist’s role in, 155, 173
fermentable carbohydrate intake,
165–166
oral hygiene procedures, 166
deep, indirect pulp treatment of,
224–226, 224f–226f
see also Pulp therapy
diagnostic tools for, 171–172
digital imaging fiberoptic
transillumination, 171–172
infrared laser fluorescence
(DIAGNOdent), 171, 171f
quantitative light fluorescence, 172
in early childhood, 158–159, 159f–160f

686

Index

Caries, dental (Continued)
early detection of, 162–163
etiology of, 156–157, 157f
fluoride uses, 166–171
combined therapies, 170
communal water fluoridation,
167–168
in dental office, topical, 168–169,
169f
in dietary supplements, 170
fluoride-containing dentifrices, 168,
168f
for fluorosis, 170–171
in general anesthesia patient, topical,
169–170
home-use mouthrinses, toothpastes,
and gels, 170
over-the-counter mouthrinses and
gels, 170
genetics and, 98–99
hereditary factors of, 162
incidence of, 156
nursing, 158–159
pre-eruptive, 54–56, 54f–55f
in preschool children, 157–158
preventive therapies for, 172
chlorhexidine and thymol, 172
povidone-iodine, 172
xylitol, 172
in primary teeth. see Primary teeth;
cavity preparation in
rampant, 158, 159f, 164
restorative dentistry for, 194–196
see also Restorative dentistry
risk assessment, 163–164, 164t–165t
AAPD policy statement, 158
saliva and, 159–161
deficiency of, 160–161, 161f
flow reduction of, 161
viscosity of, 161
in school children, 158
sealants, pit and fissure, 178
socioeconomic status and, 161–162
teeth arrangement in arch, 162
treatment of, 221–242
vaccine, 172
Caries-Risk Assessment Tool (CAT), 516
Carriers, of hemophilia, 543
Cartilage, growth of, 378
Cartoons, on toothbrushes, 121, 121f
CAT. see Caries-Risk Assessment Tool
(CAT)
Cavities. see Caries, dental
CCD. see Capitation contract dentistry
(CCD)
CCPH. see Community Campus
Partnerships for Health (CCPH)
CDC. see Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention (CDC)
Cell differentiation, 89–90
Cellulitis, 40–41, 41f
Cements
luting
glass-ionomer, 219
polycarboxylate, 219
zinc phosphate, 218
resins, 219–220

Cements (Continued)
tetracalcium phosphate, for pulp
capping, 235
zinc oxide-eugenol, 164–165
Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention (CDC), 648
Central papillary atrophy, of tongue, 72
Cephalometrics, 390–414, 391f
Angle classification of occlusion in,
406–408, 407f–408f
anteroposterior interarch discrepancies
in, 403–404, 403f–404f
computerized, 402
dentofacial measurements in, summary
of lateral, 413f
directions of growth in, 401–402, 402f
for facial aesthetics, 408–414, 409f
frontal view, 409–411, 409f–412f
profile view, 411–414, 412f–413f
in facial types, 404
frontal assessment in, 400–401, 401f
interpretation of, 395
lateral assessment in, 396–400
mandibular dental, 398–399, 398f
mandibular skeletal, 397–398,
397f–398f
maxillary dental, 396–397,
396f–397f
maxillary skeletal, 396, 396f
soft tissue, 400, 400f
vertical, 399, 399f
radiographic technique in, 391–393,
392f
frontal (posteroanterior) film,
392–393, 393f
lateral head film, 391–392, 392f
reference lines, angles and planes in,
395, 395f
reference points for lateral tracing in,
394–395, 394f
tracing technique in, 393–394,
393f–394f
vertical arch discrepancies in, 405
Cerebral palsy, 529–531
and enamel hypoplasia, 50
CF point, 395
CGH. see Comparative genomic
hybridization (CGH)
Charters method, of toothbrushing, 127
Chédiak-Higashi syndrome, 48
and periodontitis, 100, 259
Cheiloplasty, in cleft lip and palate, 488
Chemically cured sealant, 181
Chemotherapy
and enamel hypoplasia, 52, 53f
for plaque control, 129–132, 130b
antiseptic agents, 129–132, 130f–131f
enzymes, 132
plaque attachment interference
agents, 132
plaque-modifying agents, 132
sugar substitutes, 132
Cherubism (familial fibrous dysplasia),
45–48, 46f–47f
Chewing gum
for caries prevention, 172
for plaque control, 132

Child abuse and neglect, 110–119
definition of, 110–112
documentation of, 117
emotional or psychological abuse, 111,
111t
evaluation of, 113–116, 114f–116f
communication with patient in, 114
history-taking in, 113–114
physical examination in, 114–116,
115f
indicators of, 112–113
behavioral, 113
physical, 112–113, 113f
legal requirements in, 118
management of, 116–118
medical, 111–112
neglect, 111
obligation of dentist in, 118
parental concerns in, 117–118
physical abuse, 110, 111t
reporting of, 117
sexual abuse, 111, 111t
statistics of, 112
treatment of, 116–117
victims of, 112
Child protective service agencies,
117–118
Children
criteria for exposing of, to ionizing
radiation, 30–32, 36t–37t
diet sodas and sports/energy drinks for,
151
fruit drinks and juices for, 151
healthy eating in, 150
ideal dinner plate for, 150
meal replacement shakes and
smoothies for, 151
oral health and dental care, 647–649,
647f
community oral health programs
with impact on, 650–651
conceptual framework for, 645–647
disease burden and caries
consequences, 648
structure of dental public health and
role in, 649–650, 650b
utilization and government impacts,
648–649
unhealthy eating in, 150
vegetarian diet for, 150
Children’s Health Insurance Program
(CHIP), 646
CHIP. see Children’s Health Insurance
Program (CHIP)
Chloral hydrate, 313–314, 319
Chlorhexidine
as oral antimicrobial agent, 172
for plaque control, 251–252
Chondrocranium, 378
Chondroectodermal dysplasia, 368–372
Christ-Siemens-Touraine syndrome, 64
Christmas disease, 540
Chromosomal microarray (CMA), 90–91
Chromosomes, 90–91
aberrations in, 91t
in leukemia, 553
Ciprofloxacin, pigmentation of teeth, 68

Index

Claims, insurance, 657
Clamps, in restorations, 187–188,
187f–189f
Classification
Angle system, of occlusion, 406–408,
407f–408f
of children’s cooperative behavior,
292–293
of cleft lip and palate, 479, 480f
Cleft lip and palate (CLP), 479–497
classification of, 479, 480f
and enamel hypoplasia, 51
genetics of, 104–105
multidisciplinary team, 479–480
dental specialties, 481–483,
481f–482f
medical and allied health specialties,
483–484
multifactorial inheritance in, 97, 97f
oral health risk factors of, 490t
sequencing of treatment in, 484–497
stage I (infant appliance stage: birth to
18 months of age), 484–490
airway obstruction, 488, 488f
bone grafting of alveolar cleft,
488–489
cheiloplasty, 488
maxillary orthopedics, 488, 489f
obturator therapy, 486, 486f
palatoplasty, 489
presurgical orthopedics, 486–488,
487f
stage II (primary dentition stage: 18
months to 5 years of age), 490,
491f
stage III (late primary or early mixed
dentition stage: 6 to 10 or 11 years
of age), 490–494, 492f–493f
alveolar cleft bone graft, 490–493,
494f–496f
facial aesthetics, 493–494, 496f
stage IV (permanent dentition stage: 12
to 18 years of age), 494–497
Cleidocranial dysplasia, eruption of teeth
and, 365–367, 365f–366f
Clinical deviation, 391
Clinical genetics, 87–109
and craniofacial, oral, and dental
conditions, 98–99
cleft lip and palate, 104–105
dental caries and, 98–99
external apical root resorption, 104
malocclusion and, 101–103
periodontal disease and, 99–101
review of genetic principles, 87–89
autosomal-dominant inheritance,
93, 93f
autosomal-recessive inheritance,
93–94, 94f
cell differentiation and
developmental biology, 89–90
developmental biology of enamel,
92–93
hereditary traits in families, 91–92
multifactorial inheritance, 96–98
in human diseases, 97–98
X-linked dominant, 94, 94f

Clinical genetics (Continued)
X-linked or sex-linked inheritance,
94–95
X-linked recessive, 95, 95f
Clotrimazole, for acute candidiasis, 250
Clotting factor, 543
CMA. see Chromosomal microarray (CMA)
Cocaine, in pain control, 275
Codeine
in postoperative care unit, 342
for postoperative pain, 284t
Coffin-Lowry syndrome, 48
Colds, foods for prevention of, 151
Communal water fluoridation, 167–168
Communication, with children, by
dental team, 297–298
active listening in, 298
appropriate responses in, 298
communicator, establishment of, 297
establishment of, 297
message clarity in, 297
multisensory, 298
problem ownership in, 298
voice control in, 297–298
word substitutes in, 297b
Community Campus Partnerships for
Health (CCPH), 651
Community oral health, 645–652
programs with impact on children’s
oral health, 650–651
Comparative genomic hybridization
(CGH), 90–91
Computed tomography (CT)
medical, 29–30
for oral surgery, 637
Computer-controlled local anesthetic
delivery system, 282
Computerized cephalometric diagnosis,
402
Condensation, of amalgam, 216
Conditioning, aversive, 299–300
Condylion, 394
Condyloma acuminatum, 604, 605f
Cone beam computed tomography, 29, 34f
Congenital anomalies. see Cleft lip
and palate (CLP); Down syndrome
(trisomy 21 syndrome)
Consanguineous mating, 94
Contemporary Oral and Maxillofacial
Surgery, 629, 632
Cosmetic surgery, in cleft lip and palate,
495–497
Cranial nerve, in tooth trauma, 566
Craniofacial fibrous dysplasia, 610
Craniofacial growth
basic concepts of, 379–380, 380f
principles of, 377–379, 377f–379f
Craniosynostosis syndromes, 96
Crenation, 72
Crossbite. see Occlusion, developing.
Crouzon syndrome, 96, 484
Crowns
all-ceramic and metal-ceramic, for
single teeth, 498–499, 499f–500f
cosmetic zirconia, 200–201, 201f
fracture, 566, 571f–572f
stainless steel, 197–199, 197f

687

CT. see Computed tomography (CT)
Cyanotic congenital heart disease, 536,
536f
Cyclic neutropenia (cyclic
hematopoiesis), 48
Cyklokapron, 544
Cystic fibrosis, 533
and pigmentation of teeth, 67
Cysts
dental lamina, 356–357, 358f
eruption, 354, 355f
eruption hematoma, 613
odontogenic, 612–615, 638
dentigerous, 613, 613f
eruption, 613
keratocyst, 614–615, 614f
nevoid basal carcinoma (Gorlin)
syndrome, 615
primordial, 612–613
traumatic bone, 638, 639f

D

DDAVP. see Desmopressin acetate
(DDAVP)
Deep bite, 405, 406f
de Lange syndrome, 368–372
Deletion, chromosomal, 91t
Delmopinol, 132
Denavir, 247
Dens invaginatus (dens in dente), 43,
44f–45f
Dental arch
growth of. see Face and dental arch
growth
pattern, 385–388
compensations in development of,
387
environmental factors on, 388
ideal, 385
maintenance of, 387, 387t
similar stage sequencing in, 385
tooth size/arch size ratio in, 386
Dental disease, in hemophilia, 545
Dental health education programs, 680
Dental insurance, 675
different types of, 675–676
Dental lamina, 80
Dental materials, 206–220
alloy selection, 215
amalgam, 214–218
bonded amalgam restorations, 217
for cavity preparation treatment, 207
cements, 218–220
glass-ionomer, 219
luting, 218–220
polycarboxylate, 219
resin, 219–220
zinc oxide-eugenol, 218
zinc phosphate, 218
ceramics, 218
condensation, 216
high-copper alloys, 215
marginal breakdown and bulk fracture,
216–217, 216f
mechanical amalgamators, 216, 216f
mercury/alloy ratio in, 215
mercury toxicity in, 217–218

688

Index

Dental materials (Continued)
moisture of, 216
regulatory considerations for, 206
resins, restorative, 208–214
acid-etch technique, 212, 213f
conventional composites, 208–209,
208f–209f, 208t
dental adhesives, 212–214
dentin bonding, 212–214
enamel bonding, 212
hybrid composites, 209–210
inlays, 212
light-cured composites, 210–211,
211f
microfilled composites, 209, 209f
posterior composite restoration,
211–212
for restorations, temporary and
permanent, 207–208
tooth-restoration interface, 206–207
trituration, 215
Dental midline, 400
Dental office
accessibility for SHCN, 514, 515f
oral hygiene programs in, 135
technology, 681
topical fluorides in, 168–169, 169f
Dental public health, 648–649
Dental pulp, calcific metamorphosis of,
580–581, 580f–581f
Dental specialties, in cleft lip and palate,
481–483, 481f–482f
Dental team
behavior guidance, 295–297
attitude of team in, 296
flexibility in, 297
organization in, 296
positive approach to, 296
tolerance in, 297
truthfulness in, 296
strategies of, in behavior management,
294–301
aversive conditioning in, 299–300
behavior shaping, 298–299, 299f
communicating with children in,
297–298
gift, giving of, 301
limitations in, 301
parent-child separation in,
300–301
preappointment behavior
modification in, 295, 296f
reinforcements, tangible, 301
retraining in, 299
scheduling in, 300
Dentifrices
fluoride-containing, 168, 168f
plaque control and, 125–126, 125f
Dentin, inherited defects of
dentinogenesis imperfecta (hereditary
opalescent dentin), 56–59,
56f–58f
dysplasia, 59
Dentinogenesis imperfecta, 96
Dento-alveolar trauma, radiographic
exposures in, 32
Dentofacial Orthopedics, 468

Dentures
for early tooth loss, 423–424
fixed partial, 500–503
complete crown retainers, 502–503
pontics, 503
resin-bonded retainers, 500–502,
501f–504f
to jaw midlines, 400
removable partial, 503–505, 505f
Desmopressin acetate (DDAVP), 542–543
Development
chronologic ages and, 287, 287b
in medical/dental history, 3, 4f
milestones in, 287, 288t–290t
of occlusion. see Occlusion, developing
physical, 287
poverty and, 286–287
of primary teeth. see Primary teeth,
development and morphology of
visual-motor skill mastery and,
128–129
Developmental biology, 89–90
of enamel, 92–93
Diabetes mellitus
genetics and, 97
juvenile, premature exfoliation, 48
obesity and, 145
and periodontitis, 259
Diastemas, in eruption guidance for
canines, 462, 463f
Diazepam (Valium), 311
Diet, fluoride supplements in, 170
Dietary intake patterns, 139–141
eating out, 141
meal pattern and frequency, 141
portion sizes, 141
Diffusion hypoxia, 315
DIFOTI. see Digital imaging fiberoptic
transillumination (DIFOTI)
Digit sucking, 437–440, 437f, 439f–441f
Digital imaging, in dental care, 402
Digital imaging fiberoptic
transillumination (DIFOTI),
171–172
Dilaceration, 586, 586f
Diphenhydramine, 311
for herpes simplex virus infection, 246
Diplegia, 529
Direct film, in radiography, 20, 20t
Direct pulp cap, vital pulp exposures
treatment of, 569–572, 572f
Direction, of growth, 375
Disclosing agents, 126–127, 126f
Disease burden, 648
and caries consequences, 648
Dismissal, of employee, 667–668
Distal shoe appliances, 430, 431f
Disto-occlusion, 403
DNA, test kit for aggressive periodontitis,
259
Documentation
of child abuse and neglect, 117
for nitrous oxide sedation, 315–316
for sedation, 320–321
Dolichofacial pattern, 404, 405f
Double-mask scavenger breathing circuit,
314, 315f

Down syndrome (trisomy 21 syndrome),
90, 90f, 527
eruption of teeth in, 362–365, 365f
and periodontitis, 259
premature exfoliation, 48
Dyclonine, in pain control, 275
Dyclonine hydrochloride, for herpes
simplex virus infection, 246

E

Early childhood caries (ECC), 646–647
Eating disorders, 148–150
ECC. see Early childhood caries (ECC)
Ecchymoses, in leukemia, 555, 555f
Ectodermal dysplasias, 64, 65f–66f
Ectopic eruption, 355
Ehlers-Danlos syndrome, 100
premature exfoliation, 48
Elastics
for crossbite, 449, 449f
for ectopic eruption, 456
Electric pulp testing, 223
Electrical trauma, 596
Elephantiasis gingivae, 253
Ellis-van Creveld syndrome, 368–372
Emergency dental treatment, 16
of fractured teeth without pulp
exposure, 568–569
fragment restoration, 568–569, 570f
temporary bonded resin restoration,
569, 571f
in hemophilia, 547
of soft-tissue injury, 568
Emotional abuse, 111, 111t
Emotions, dental caries and, 158
Employee management, 661–668, 665f
Enamel
developmental biology of, 92–93
hypoplasia, 49–54, 49f
allergy-related, 50–51
from brain injury and neurologic
defects, 50
cleft lip and palate, 51
fluoride and, 53–54
ionizing radiation and
chemotherapy, 52, 53f
lead poisoning (plumbism) and, 51
local infection and trauma, 51,
51f–52f
microabrasion and, 54, 54f
molar-incisor hypomineralization
and, 52–53
nephrotic syndrome and, 50
from nutritional deficiencies, 49–50,
50f
from rubella embryopathy, 52, 53f
treatment of, 53
hypoplasia of, 93
Endocarditis, infective, 536
Endocrine system, and gingivitis,
252–253, 252f
Endogenous opioid system (EOS), 312
Environmental factors, on dental arch
pattern, 388
Environmental health, 646
Enzymes, in plaque control, 132
EOS. see Endogenous opioid system (EOS)

Index

Epigenetics, 96
Epistasis, 96
Epstein pearls, 356–357
Epulis of newborn, congenital, 608–609,
608f
Equilibration, selective, 452
Equipment
for nitrous oxide sedation, 314,
315f–316f
for sedation, 319–320
for SHCN patients, 514–515, 515f
Eruption gingivitis, 244, 244f
Eruption of teeth, 349–374
Bohn nodules in, 356–357
chronologic development and,
349–352, 350t
molecular mechanisms in,
351, 351f
premature loss of primary molars in,
351–352
sequence variations in, 352, 352f
delayed, diagnostic algorithm for, 372f
dental lamina cysts in, 356–357, 358f
Epstein pearls in, 356–357
local and systemic factors in, 357–372
achondroplastic dwarfism in, 368,
371f
ankylosed teeth, 357–360, 359f–361f
permanent teeth, 360–362,
363f–364f
of primary molars with no
permanent successors, 360,
362f
cleidocranial dysplasia, 365–367,
365f–366f
hypopituitarism in, 367, 370f
hypothyroidism in, 367, 368f–369f
other causes, 368–372
trisomy 21 syndrome in, 362–365,
365f
mandibular permanent incisors,
352–354, 353f
natal and neonatal, 355–356,
356f–358f
problems and guidance in, 454–467
ectopic, of first permanent molars,
455–458, 455f–457f
in lower incisor segment, 458, 459f
in mandibular canine and premolar
segment, 459–461, 460f
in maxillary canine and premolar
segment, 461–467, 461f
teething and difficult eruption,
354–355
ectopic, 355
hematoma in, 354, 355f
sequestrum in, 355, 355f
Erythematous (atrophic) lesion, 550
Etching, in pit and fissure sealants, 179
Ethnic factors
in cleft lip and palate, 105
in dental arch pattern, 385
malocclusions and, 102
Ethyl aminobenzoate, in pain control,
275
Euphemisms, 297, 297b
Ewing’s sarcoma, 620–621, 621f

Examination
of mouth, 1–16, 2t
biofilm, 16
clinical examination, 5, 8f–9f
diagnostic method, 3
early examination, 11
emergency treatment, 1, 16
infant dental care, 12–13, 13f
infection control, 15–16
medical and dental history, 3–5, 4f
parental contact, 1–3
radiographic examination, 11
substance abuse, 13–14
suicidal tendencies, 14–15
temporomandibular evaluation,
5–11, 9f–10f
uniform dental recording, 11
physical, in child abuse, 114–116, 115f
Exfoliation, early, 43–48
acrodynia, 48
cherubism (familial fibrous dysplasia),
45–48, 46f–47f
cyclic neutropenia (cyclic
hematopoiesis), 48
hypophosphatasia, 44–45
hypophosphatemia, 48
Exodontia, simple, 629–632, 630f–631f
Expansion appliances, 472
Extraction, of impacted teeth other than
third molars, 637
Extraoral radiography, 29–30
cephalometric imaging, 29
cone beam computed tomography, 29,
34f
magnetic resonance imaging, 30, 35f
medical computed tomography,
29–30
oblique lateral radiography, 29, 33f
panoramic imaging, 29, 32f
ultrasound imaging, 30, 35f
Eye contact, 298

F

Face and dental arch growth, 375–389
craniofacial pattern in, 380–381
dental arch pattern, 385–388
compensations in development of,
387
environmental factors on, 388
ideal, 385
maintenance of, 387, 387t
similar stage sequencing in, 385
tooth size/arch size ratio in, 386
nature of, 375–380, 376f
basic concepts in, 376–377, 377f
craniofacial growth in, 377–380,
377f–379f
occlusion
consistency in pattern development
of, 383
ideal static pattern in, 383–384
maintenance of, 384–385
opposing first molars in, 383, 384t
primary dentition terminus in, 383,
384f
patterns of
consistency in maturation, 381, 381f

689

Face and dental arch growth (Continued)
dentofacial, ideal paradigms for,
380–381
frontal, ideal, 381, 381f
maintenance of, 382
profile, ideal, 381–382, 383f
and somatic growth, 382–383, 383f
Facial axis, 395
Facial plane, 395
Factor VIII deficiency. see Hemophilia
Factor XI deficiency. see Hemophilia
Failure to thrive, 142–145
Famciclovir, for herpes simplex virus
infection, 247
Familial fibrous dysplasia (cherubism),
45–48, 46f–47f
Fat, dietary
harmful, 151
healthful, 151
FDA. see Food and Drug Administration
(FDA)
Fear/anxiety, dental, 291
dental behavior management and, 291
Federally funded programs, 676
Fédération Dentaire Internationale’s
Special Committee on Uniform
Dental Recording, 11
Feeding disorders, 148–150
Fees. see Practice management
Fentanyl (Sublimaze), 313
Feracrylum, for pulp capping, 235
Ferric sulfate, for pulp capping, 234–235
Fetal alcohol spectrum disorder (FASD),
528
Fiberoptic transillumination, digital
imaging, 171–172
Fibrinolysins, in cellulitis, 41
Fibroma, 604, 639–640
ameloblastic, 617
cemento-ossifying, 611, 611f
juvenile ossifying, 611
peripheral odontogenic (WHO type),
605–606
peripheral ossifying, 605–606
Fibromatosis, 619
Fibrosarcoma, 619
Fibrous dysplasia, 610–611, 610f
and periodontitis, 259
Fillers, of resins, 208, 208f
First-pass effect, 307
Fiscal management, 654–658
accounts payable, 657
budget setting, 656
business plan, 654–655, 655b
fees, 657, 657f–658f
monitor goal numbers, 655–656
monitoring reports regularly, 656–657
monitoring schedule, 656
Fissured tongue, 71
Fixed transpalatal wires, with springs,
448–449, 448f
Flexibility, of dental team, 297
Floss/flossing
in leukemia, 557
in plaque control, 123–124, 123f–124f,
128, 128f, 166
Flu, foods for prevention of, 151

690

Index

Fluconazole, for acute candidiasis, 250
Flumazenil (Romazicon), 312
Fluorescence
infrared laser (DIAGNOdent), 171, 171f
quantitative light, 172
Fluorides
in communal water, 167–168
in dentifrices, 125, 168, 168f
in dietary supplements, 170
and enamel hypoplasia, 53–54
in home-use mouthrinses, toothpastes,
and gels, 170
in over-the-counter mouthrinses and
gels, 170
for SHCN patients, 519
topical
in dental office, 168–169, 169f
in general anesthesia, 169–170
Folic acid, neural tube defects and, 105
Food allergies, 151
Food and Drug Administration (FDA), in
food and nutrition labeling practices,
150
Food insecurity, 141–142
Food security, definition of, 142
Food Stamp Program, 142
Formocresol, 229, 234, 235f
Formulas, infant, dental caries and,
158–159
Fractures
see also Trauma, to teeth and supporting
tissues
in child abuse, 112–115
of mandible, 642–644
Fragile X syndrome, 528
Frankfort horizontal plane (FH), 395
Frankl behavior rating scale, 293
Fraser suction tip, 629f
FRC. see Functional reserve capacity (FRC)
Frenum
abnormalities, 264, 264f
frenotomy and frenectomy, 264–265
in hemophilia, 545–546
labial, 73–74, 73f–74f
Frontometaphyseal dysplasia, 368–372
Functional inquiry, 293–294, 293b
Functional reserve capacity (FRC), 306
Fungal infection, in HIV infection, 550
Fusion of teeth, 42, 43f
The Future of Public Health, 649

G

Gardner syndrome, 368–372
Gels
over-the-counter fluoride, 170
prescription home-use fluoride, 170
Gemination, 42–43, 43f
Gender differences, in tooth eruption, 351
Gene expression
in amelogenesis imperfecta, 60
in dentin anomalies, 56–57
epigenetics, 96
expressivity, 96
in hypodontia, 62–63
penetrance, 96
regulation of, 89
variation in, 96

General Anesthesia Spinal (GAS) study,
305
Genetic conditions, salivary flow and,
161
Genetic lesions, and gingivitis,
253, 253f
Genome, 87
sequencing, cost of, 88–89, 89f
Genotype, 87
Geographic tongue, 71, 71f
Giant cell granuloma, central, 611–612,
612f
GIC. see Glass-ionomer cement (GIC)
Gift, giving of, 301
Gingicaine, 275
Gingival granular cell lesion, 608–609,
608f
Gingivitis, 243–273
acute, 245–250
bacterial infections, 250
candidiasis (thrush, candidosis,
moniliasis), 250, 250f
herpes simplex virus infection,
245–248, 246f–248f
necrotizing ulcerative (Vincent
infection), 249, 250f
recurrent aphthous ulcer (canker
sore), 248–249, 248f
allergy and, 245
chlorhexidine, for plaque control,
251–252
chronic nonspecific, 250–251, 251f
definition of, 243–244
dental plaque-induced, 244–245, 245f
eruption, 244, 244f
gingival inflammation, 245
HIV infection and, 551
by systemic factors, 252–256
ascorbic acid deficiency, 256, 256f
endocrine system, 252–253, 252f
genetic lesions, 253, 253f
phenytoin-induced overgrowth,
254–256, 254f
Gingivoperiosteoplasty (GPP), 486
Glass-ionomer cement (GIC), 219
resin-modified, 219
as sealant, 177–178
Glass-ionomer material, 164–165
Glossitis, median rhomboid, 72
Gluten, 152
Gnathion, 394
Goltz syndrome, 368–372
Gonion, 394
Government, dental care utilization and,
648–649
Gow-Gates mandibular block technique,
of anesthesia, 277, 277f
GPP. see Gingivoperiosteoplasty (GPP)
Graft-versus-host disease (GVHD),
558–559
Granulomas
central giant cell, 611–612, 612f
eosinophilic, 622–623
peripheral giant cell, 606
pyogenic, 604, 605f
Growth hormone receptor, malocclusions
and, 102

Growth of face and dental arches.
see Face and dental arch growth
Guidance, anticipatory, 1
Günther disease, 66
GVHD. see Graft-versus-host disease
(GVHD)

H

Haim-Munk syndrome, periodontal
disease and, 101
Hajdu-Cheney syndrome, 48
Halothane, 337
Halterman appliance, 457–458, 457f
Hand hygiene, infection control in
dental office, 15
Hand-over-mouth exercise (HOME),
299–300
Hand-Schüller-Christian disease, 249,
621–623, 623f
Haplotype blocks, 98
Hawley-type appliance, 440, 440f,
447–448, 447f
Hawthorne effect, 124
Head
infection of region of, 640–644
inspection and palpation of, 5
Headgear, extraoral, 472
Healthy People 2010, 146
oral health objectives targeting
children, 650b
Healthy People 2020, 139, 139t
Healthy People objectives, 652f
Hearing loss (deafness), 533–534, 533t
Heart disease
acquired
infective endocarditis, 536,
537b–538b
rheumatic fever, 536
cardiac surgery patients, 537
congenital, 535–537, 536f
obesity and, 146
Hemangioma, 607–608
Hematoma, eruption, 354, 355f
Hematopoiesis, cyclic, 48
Hematopoietic stem cell transplantation,
558–560
admission and nursing interventions
of, 560, 560b
graft-versus-host disease, 559
oral complications of, 558–559
pretransplantation preparation in,
559
remission phase of, 560
Hemiplegia, 529
Hemophilia, 540–547
antifibrinolytic agents for, 544–545
complications of, 543–544
dental management of, 545–547
antibiotic prophylaxis, 547
dental disease, 545
emergencies, 547
oral surgery, 546–547
orthodontic treatment, 547
periodontal therapy, 545–546
pulpal therapy, 546
restorative procedures, 546
surgical complications, 547

Index

Hemophilia (Continued)
hemostasis disorders, 540–541,
541f–542f
pain control for, 545
procoagulant classification of,
541–542
risks to dental staff, 544
treatment of, 542–544
von Willebrand disease, 543
women with bleeding disorders, 543
Hemophilia A, treatment of, 542–543
Hemophilia B, treatment of, 543
Hemorrhage
internal, 580, 580f
pulpal, 226–227, 227f
Hepatitis. see Viral hepatitis
Hereditary factors, dental caries and, 162
Hereditary gingival fibromatosis (HGF),
253, 253f
Hereditary opalescent dentin, 56–59,
56f–58f
Heritability, 91
Herpes simplex virus (HSV) infection,
245–248, 246f–248f, 550–551
Herpes zoster (shingles), 551
HGF. see Hereditary gingival fibromatosis
(HGF)
High-copper alloys, 215
Hiring, of personnel, 662–664
Histiocytosis X, 621–623, 623f
and periodontitis, 259
Histodifferentiation, of tooth, 81
HIV. see Human immunodeficiency virus
(HIV)
“Hollywood” bridge, 424, 426f
Home dental care, for SHCN patients,
516–518, 517f–518f
Home oral hygiene
fluoride mouthrinses, toothpastes, gels,
170
mechanical and chemotherapeutic,
120–137
plaque control. see Plaque, control of
Homologue chromosome, 90
Horizontal scrubbing method, of
toothbrushing, 127
Hormone, for tooth eruption, 351
Hospital dental services, 328–348
abbreviations commonly used in,
335b–336b
admission, 334, 334f, 335b
general anesthesia
end time-out protocol, 341–342
indication for, 329
inhalation, 336–337, 336f
medical history and physical
examination, 331–334, 332f–
333f, 333b–334b
perioral cleaning, draping, and
placement of pharyngeal throat
pack, 337–339, 340f–344f
postanesthesia care unit, 342
postoperative care, 342–344, 345f,
346b, 347f
preparation of child, time-out
protocol in, 337, 338f–340f
operating room protocol, 335–336

Hospital dental services (Continued)
outpatient versus inpatient surgery,
330–331, 331t
restorative dentistry in operating room,
339–341, 344f
staff privileges, 328–329
Hospitalization
in medical/dental history, 3
psychological effects of, 329–330
HSV. see Herpes simplex virus (HSV)
infection
Human genome project, 87
Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV),
550–551
in hemophilia, 544
Humphrey appliance, 456–457
Hunter syndrome, 368–372
Hurricaine, 275
Hutchinson-Gilford syndrome, 368–372
Hyaluronidase, in cellulitis, 41
Hybrid glass ionomers, 219
Hydrocephalus, genetics and, 97
Hydrocodone, for postoperative pain, 284t
Hydroxyzine, 310
Hyperbilirubinemia, teeth discoloration
in, 65–66, 67f
Hyperemia, pulpal, 579–580
Hyperpituitarism, premature exfoliation, 48
Hyperplastic lesion, 550
Hypertension, genetics and, 97
Hyperthyroidism, premature exfoliation,
48
Hypnosis, in hemophilia, 545
Hypnotics, 313–314
Hypocalcification, 49
disorders
autosomal-dominant inheritance
and, 93
genetics of, 93
of injured permanent tooth buds,
585–586, 586f
Hypodontia, 62–63
and cancer, 63–64
and malocclusion, 101–102
and palatally displaced canines, 63
Hypomaturation, genetics of, 93–95
Hypophosphatasia, 44–45
and periodontitis, 259
Hypophosphatemia, 48
see also Rickets
familial, 368–372
Hypopituitarism, 367, 370f
Hypoplasia
of enamel. see Enamel, hypoplasia
of injured permanent tooth buds,
585–586, 586f
Hypothyroidism, eruption of teeth and,
367
congenital, 367, 368f
juvenile, 367, 369f
Hypoxia, diffusion, 315
Hyrax appliance, 452, 453f, 454

I

Ibuprofen, for postoperative pain, 284t
Idiopathic lesions, in HIV infection, 551
IL-1β, root resorption and, 104

691

Image receptors, in radiography, 20–23
analog film, 20–21
image-viewing conditions, 22–23,
23f–24f
photo-stimulable phosphor storage
plates, 21, 21f–22f
solid-state sensors, 21, 22f
Image-viewing conditions, of
radiographic image receptors, 22–23,
23f–24f
Immune disorders, salivary flow and, 161
Impacted teeth, 632–637
other than third molars
surgical exposure and, 634–635,
635f–636f
surgical uprighting, 635–637,
636f–637f
Impetigo, 5, 9f
Implant prostheses, for adolescent,
506–507, 507f–508f
before growth completion, 507,
509f–510f
for orthodontic anchorage, 507
Incisors
eruption guidance for, 458, 459f
mandibular, infiltration anesthesia for,
277
mandibular central, 82
mandibular lateral, 82
maxillary central, 82–84, 82f–83f
maxillary lateral, 82
permanent mandibular, lingual
eruption of, 352–354, 353f
primary, early loss of, 423–424,
424f–426f
primary and permanent, anesthesia
for, 278
Incontinentia pigmenti syndrome,
368–372
Indemnity plans, 675
Indirect film, in radiography, 20–21, 20f
Infants
birth to 18 months of age, cleft lip and
palate, 484–490
airway obstruction, 488, 488f
bone grafting, 488–489
cheiloplasty, 488
maxillary orthopedics, 488, 489f
obturator, 485–486, 485f–486f
palatoplasty, 489
presurgical orthopedics, 486–488,
487f
dental care, 12–13, 13f
home oral hygiene for, 133, 133f
low-fluoride dentifrice for, 126
natal and neonatal teeth in, 355,
356f–358f
Infections
control in dental office, 15–16
and enamel hypoplasia, 51, 51f–52f
of head and neck region, 640–644
herpes simplex virus, 245–248,
246f–248f
in HIV infection, 550–551
Informed consent, 300
for sedation, 321–322
Infraocclusion, 357

692

Index

Inhalation anesthetics, properties of,
336–337, 336f
Inheritance
autosomal-dominant, 93, 93f
autosomal-recessive, 93–94, 94f
multifactorial, 96–98
in human diseases, 97–98
X-linked or sex-linked, 94–95
dominant, 94, 94f
recessive, 95, 95f
Injection techniques. see Anesthesia, local
Inlays, resin, 212
Instruments, infection control in dental
office, 15
Insurance
see also Practice management
dental, 675
Intact dental occlusion, 481–482
Intellectual disability, 291, 522–527
in cerebral palsy, 530
classification of, 527t
dental treatment of patient with,
525–527
Intelligence quotient (IQ), 291
tests for, 291
Interim therapeutic restorative technique,
201
International Association of Dental
Traumatology, 563
Interviewing, of personnel, 662–664
Intraoral radiography, 23–29
bitewing, 23–27, 27f
oblique occlusal, 27, 29f, 31f
periapical, 23
Intravenous sedation, 305
Inventory control, 681
Ionizing radiation
criteria for exposing of children to,
30–32, 36t–37t
and enamel hypoplasia, 52, 53f
IQ. see Intelligence quotient (IQ)
Iron, dietary, 143
Iron-deficiency anemia, 143
Irrigators, oral, 127
Isolation, pit and fissure sealants, 179
Isolite system, 188–189, 189f

J

Jaw, fibro-osseous lesions of, 609–610
Jet injection, of local anesthesia, 275
Joint contractures, in cerebral palsy, 530
Justification principle, of radiation
protection, 17

K

Kaopectate, for herpes simplex virus
infection, 246
Kaposi sarcoma, 551
Karyotype, 90, 90f
Kawasaki disease, tongue anomalies, 72
Keratocyst, odontogenic, 614–615, 614f
KRI paste, 231
Kwashiorkor, 142

L

Labial Edgewise archwires, 448–449
Langerhans cell histiocytosis, 621–623

Laser Doppler flowmeter, pulp blood
flow, 223
Lasers, for periodontal disease, 268–269
Latex allergy, spina bifida and, 531
Lead apron, 19, 20f
Lead poisoning, and enamel hypoplasia,
51
Leadership, doctor, 658–661, 660f
Learning disabilities, 527–528
Ledermix, 593
Leeway space, 386–387, 417
Legal requirements, in child abuse and
neglect, 118
Lesch-Nyhan syndrome, 263–264
Letterer-Siwe disease, 622, 622f
Leukemia, 551–558, 552t, 554t
dental management of, 555–558,
556t–558t
oral manifestations of, 554–555,
555f–556f
and periodontitis, 259
premature exfoliation, 48
Leukocyte adhesion deficiency, and
periodontitis, 100, 259
Lice, head, 5, 8f
Lidocaine
for herpes simplex virus infection, 246
in pain control, 275
Life cycle of tooth, 80–81, 81f
Life expectancy
comparison of, 138t
obesity and, 146
Light
composites cured by,
210–211, 211f
sealants cured by, 177, 180f, 181
Limitation principle, of radiation
protection, 17
Lingual holding arch, 431, 431f
Listening, active, 298
Listerine Antiseptic, 249
Localized juvenile periodontitis, 257–258,
258f
Ludwig’s angina, 41
Luxation. see Trauma
Lymphangioma, 608
Lymphoma, non-Hodgkin, 551
Lyonization, 95
Lysine, for herpes simplex virus infection,
247–248

M

MAC. see Minimum alveolar
concentration (MAC)
Macroglossia, 70
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), 30,
35f
Magnitude, of growth, 375
Malnutrition, 141–142
chronic, 141
Malocclusions
in cerebral palsy, 530
genetics of, 101–103
and gingivitis, 251
Maltreatment. see Child abuse and
neglect
Managed care, 675–676

Mandible
cephalometric assessment of, 397–398
eruption guidance for, 459–461, 460f
fracture of, 642–644
growth and development of, 506
Mandibular plane, 395
Mandibular teeth
see also Canines; Incisors; Molars
anesthesia for, 275–277
conduction anesthesia (Gow-Gates
mandibular block technique),
277, 277f
conventional mandibular block,
275–276, 276f
infiltration anesthesia, for
mandibular primary molars,
276–277
infiltration for mandibular incisors,
277
lingual nerve block, 276
long buccal nerve block, 276, 276f
Marketing, in practice management
external, 680
internal, 679
Maroteaux-Lamy mucopolysaccharidosis,
368–372
“Maryland” bridge, 219–220
Maternal and child health (MCH), 646
Maxilla
cephalometric assessment of, 396
growth and development of, 506
Maxillary obturators, 484–485
Maxillary teeth
see also Canines; Incisors; Molars
anesthesia for
permanent molars, 279–280
primary and permanent incisors and
canines, 278
primary molars and premolars,
278–279, 279f
Maxillomandibular cephalometric
assessment, 400
Maxillomandibular fixation, 644
McCune-Albright syndrome, 610
MCH. see Maternal and child health
(MCH)
Meal, pattern and frequency of, 141
Mean-change-expansion scheme, 382
Mediated generalization, 297
Medicaid, 648, 650–651, 676
coverage for dental caries, 161–162
Medical and allied health specialties, for
cleft lip and palate management,
483–484
Medical/dental history, preliminary, 3–5, 4f
Medical geneticist, in cleft lip and palate
management, 484
Medical history, before general
anesthesia, 331–334, 332f–333f,
333b–334b
Medical waste, infection control in dental
office, 15–16
Medically compromised patient,
management of, 540–562
Mental retardation, 522
and calculus, 271
and enamel hypoplasia, 50

Index

Menton, 394
Meperidine (Demerol), 313
Mercury
alloy ratio, 215
toxicity of, 217–218
Meridol, for plaque control, 252
Mesial molar shift, 416–417, 416f
Mesio-occlusion, 403–404
Mesofacial pattern, 404, 405f
Metronidazole, for periodontitis, 258–259
Microabrasion, of enamel, 54, 54f
Microdeletions, 90–91
Micrognathia, 68–69, 69f
Microleakage, of dental material, 206–207
resins, 211
Microorganisms
dental caries and, 156
role in dental disease, 121
Microporosities, 179
Microsomia, hemifacial, 484
Midazolam (Versed), 311–312
Milk, human, dental caries and, 158
Miller-Dieker syndrome, 368–372
Mineral trioxide aggregates for pulp
capping, 235, 572
Minimal alveolar concentration, 336–337
Minimal residual disease (MRD), 553
Minimum alveolar concentration (MAC),
309, 309t
Mixed dentition
occlusion, development of. see
Occlusion, developing.
space analysis, 386
tooth size/arch size, 386
Mobility, tooth, 222
Modified Stillman method, of
toothbrushing, 127–128
Moisture, in amalgam, 216
Molars
early loss of, infiltration anesthesia for,
276–277
first permanent
development and calcification of,
81–82
ectopic eruption of, 455–458,
455f–457f
loss of
first, 425–428, 427f–428f
multiple, 432, 433f–434f
permanent, 433–435, 435f–436f
second, 428–432, 429f–432f
mandibular first, 84
mandibular second, 84
maxillary first, 83, 83f–84f
maxillary second, 83–84, 83f, 85f
permanent
cavity preparation, interim
restoration for hypoplastic, 197
interim restoration for hypoplastic,
197
primary
ankylosis of, with no permanent
successors, 360, 362f
premature loss of, 351–352
third, impacted, 632–633, 633f
variations in sequence of eruption of,
352, 352f

Molt elevator, 630f
Molt Mouth Prop, 520–521
Mongolism, 362
Moniliasis, 250, 250f
Monitoring of sedation, 322–324,
323f–324f
intraoperative, 322–324
for nitrous oxide sedation, 315–316
postoperative, 324
Monogenic traits, 91
Monoplegia, 529
Monosomy, 90
Morphodifferentiation, of tooth, 81
Morphology
see also Primary teeth, development and
morphology of
primary tooth pulp chamber, 84–86
primary vs. permanent teeth, 84, 85b
Mosaicism, germinal, 93
Mouth
examination of, 1–16, 2t
biofilm, 16
clinical examination, 5, 8f–9f
diagnostic method, 3
early examination, 11
emergency treatment, 1, 16
infant dental care, 12–13, 13f
infection control, 15–16
medical and dental history, 3–5, 4f
parental contact, 1–3
radiographic examination, 11
substance abuse, 13–14
suicidal tendencies, 14–15
temporomandibular evaluation,
5–11, 9f–10f
uniform dental recording, 11
physical abuse injuries to, 110
Mouthguards, protective, 508–511, 511f
Mouthrinses
over-the-counter fluoride, 170
prescription home-use fluoride, 170
MRD. see Minimal residual disease (MRD)
Mucoceles, 609, 609f, 638–639,
640f–641f
Mucus retention phenomenon, 609
Multifactorial inheritance, 96–98
in human diseases, 97–98
Multifactorial-threshold model, 97, 97f
Mumps, salivary flow and, 161
Munchausen syndrome by proxy,
111–112
Mutans streptococci (MS), dental caries
and, 156
Myelomeningocele, 531
Myosin, gene expression in
malocclusions, 102
MyPlate Food Guidance System, 139,
140f
Myxoma, odontogenic, 617

N

Naloxone (Narcan), 313
Nance appliance, 432, 432f
Nasal spine, posterior, 394–395
Nasion, 394
Nasoalveolar molding (NAM) appliance,
486–488

693

Nasopalatine nerve block, 280, 280f
National Institute of Health Consensus
Panel, pit and fissure sealants, 177
National School Lunch Program (NSLP),
140
Neck
infection of region of, 640–644
inspection and palpation of, 5
Necrosis, pulpal, 582, 583f
Necrotizing ulcerative gingivitis, 249,
250f
Needles, for anesthesia injections, 275
Neglect. see Child abuse and neglect
Neon colors, on toothbrushes, 121, 121f
Neoplasms, in HIV infection, 551
Nephrocalcinosis syndrome, 95
Nephrotic syndrome, and enamel
hypoplasia, 50
Nerve blocks
greater (anterior) palatine injection,
280, 280f–281f
inferior alveolar, 275–276, 276f
infraorbital, 281
lingual, 276
long buccal, 276, 276f
mental, 281
nasopalatine, 280, 280f
Neuroblastoma, 560
Neurofibroma, 606–607, 607f
Neurofibromatosis, 606–607, 607f
Neurologic defects, and enamel
hypoplasia, 50
Neutropenias
cyclic, 48
and periodontitis, 259
Nevoid basal carcinoma syndrome, 615
Nitrous oxide, 309–310, 316f, 627
administration of, 314–316
equipment for, 314, 315f–316f
monitoring and documentation in,
315–316
objectives of, 314
technique in, 314–315
adverse effects of, 309–310
delivery system for, 320f
mechanism of, 309
occupational exposure to,
recommendations for minimizing,
310b
oxygen and, inhalational sedation
with, 318
pharmacokinetics of, 309
toxicity of, 310
Normeperidine, 313
Nursing, dental caries and, 158–159
Nutritional considerations, for pediatric
dental patient, 138–154
dietary intake patterns, 139–141
eating out, 141
meal pattern and frequency, 141
portion sizes, 141
feeding and eating disorders, 148–150
anorexia nervosa, 148–149
binge-eating disorder, 150
bulimia, 149–150
issues in, 150–152
life expectancy comparison, 138, 138t

694

Index

Nutritional considerations, for pediatric
dental patient (Continued)
malnutrition and food insecurity,
141–142
MyPlate Food Guidance System, 139,
140f
pediatric overnutrition, 145–148
overweight and obesity, 145
pediatric undernutrition, 142–145
calcium, 144
iron, 143
vitamin B12, 145
vitamin D, 144–145
zinc, 143–144, 143b
Nutritional deficiencies, and enamel
hypoplasia, 49–50, 50f

O

Obesity
dietary intake patterns and, 140
overweight and, 145
pharmacologic management of
behavior and, 306
Oblique lateral radiography, 29, 33f
Oblique occlusal radiography, 27, 29f, 31f
Obstructive sleep apnea, and
orthodontics, 467
Obturator, in cleft lip and palate,
485–486, 485f–486f
Occlusal interferences, in pit and fissure
sealants, 181
Occlusal plane, 395
Occlusion
Angle classification of, 406–408,
407f–408f
developing, management of, 415–478
crossbite in, anterior, 443–449, 444f
fixed transpalatal wires with
springs for, 448–449, 448f
lower inclined plane in, 446–447,
446f
palatal-spring appliances for,
447–448, 447f
tongue blade/popsicle stick therapy
for, 445, 445f
crossbite in, posterior, 449–454,
449f–451f
maxillary expansion for, 452–454,
453f
selective equilibration for, 452
early loss of teeth, and space
maintenance in, 418–435, 421f
assessment of, 418–423, 423f
first primary molar loss, 425–428,
427f–428f
multiple primary molar loss, 432,
433f–434f
permanent molar loss, 433–435,
435f–436f
primary canine loss, 424–425, 426f
primary incisors loss, 423–424,
424f–426f
second primary molar loss,
428–432, 429f–432f
specific strategies for, 423–435
eruption problems and guidance in,
454–467

Occlusion (Continued)
ectopic, of first permanent molars,
455–458, 455f–457f
in lower incisor segment, 458,
459f
in mandibular canine and
premolar segment, 459–461,
460f
in maxillary canine and premolar
segment, 461–467, 461f
obstructive sleep apnea and, 467
oral habits in children and,
435–443
bruxism in, 435, 437f
digit sucking in, 437–440, 437f,
439f–441f
tongue-thrust swallowing in,
440–443, 443f
orthodontics for, 467–476
in early permanent dentition,
473–476, 475f–476f
in mid- to late mixed dentition,
471–473, 473f–474f
in primary to mid-mixed dentition,
468–471, 469f–472f
timing of interventions for, 415–418
considerations in, 417–418,
419f–420f
leeway space in, 417
mesial molar shift in, 416–417,
416f
primate spaces in, 415–416
growth and pattern of, 383–385, 384f,
384t
Occupational Safety and Health
Administration (OSHA)
operating room protocol, 335
personnel needs, 661
Odontogenesis imperfecta, 61
Odontoma, 41, 42f, 618–619, 618f
ameloblastic fibro-, 618
surgery for, 637–638, 638f
Okeson’s Management of
Temporomandibular Disorders and
Occlusion, 5
Oligodontia. see Hypodontia
Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act, 519
The One Minute Manager, 663
Open bite, 405, 406f
Open reduction and internal fixation
(ORIF), 643–644
Open Wide mouth prop, 520–521
Opioids, 312, 313f
agonists and antagonists, 312–313
fentanyl (Sublimaze), 313
meperidine (Demerol), 313
naloxone (Narcan), 313
ventilatory response to hypercarbia,
effects on, 312–313
Optimization principle, of radiation
protection, 17–18, 18t
Oral and maxillofacial surgeon, in cleft
lip and palate management, 482
Oral cleanliness, and periodontal disease,
269–270
Oral examination record, 5, 6f–7f
Oral hairy leukoplakia (HL), 551

Oral hygiene
and gingivitis, 255
in plaque reduction, 166
for SHCN patients, 516
Oral squamous cell carcinomas, 551
Oral surgery, 627–644
exodontia, simple, 629–632, 630f–631f
fibroma, 639–640
granuloma, pyogenic, 639–640
hard-tissue lesions
cysts, 638
odontoma, 637–638, 638f
for hemophilia, 546–547
impacted teeth
other than third molars, 633–637,
634f
third molars, 632–633, 633f
infection of head and neck region,
640–644
mandible fracture, 642–644
office-based, 627
outpatient versus inpatient, 330–331,
331t
soft-tissue procedures, 638–640
mucoceles, 638–639, 640f–641f
ranulas, 638–639
Oral warts, 550
OraVerse, 283–284
Orbitale, 394
Organization, in dental team, 296
Orientation, of personnel, 663
ORIF. see Open reduction and internal
fixation (ORIF)
Oropharyngeal candidal infections, 550
Orthodontics
appliances
caries and, 162
for developing occlusion. see
Occlusion, developing
for occlusion, 467–476
in early permanent dentition,
473–476, 475f–476f
in mid- to late mixed dentition,
471–473, 473f–474f
in primary to mid-mixed dentition,
468–471, 469f–472f
Orthodontist, in cleft lip and palate
management, 482
Orthognathism, 406
OSHA. see Occupational Safety and
Health Administration (OSHA)
Osteoarthritis, obesity and, 146
Osteoporosis, 144
Osteosarcoma, 560
Otolaryngologist, in cleft lip and palate
management, 484
Overdentures, 505, 506f
Overnutrition, pediatric, 145–148
Oxygen, sedation. see Nitrous oxide,
oxygen and, inhalational sedation
with
Oxyhemoglobin dissociation curve, 323,
324f

P

Pacifier, and periodontitis, 261–263
Padded tongue blades, 520–521

Index

Pain
control
see also Anesthesia, local, and pain
control for child and adolescent
for hemophilia, 545
in previous health care visits, 292
in pulpal inflammation, 221
Palatal crib appliance, 438–439, 439f
Palatal plane, 395
Palatal-spring appliances, 447–448, 447f
Palatal tissues, anesthesia for, 280
greater (anterior) palatine injection,
280, 280f–281f
nasopalatine nerve block, 280, 280f
Palatoplasty, 489
PANDA. see Pediatric Anesthesia and
Neurodevelopment Assessment study
(PANDA)
Panoramic imaging, 29, 32f
Papilloma, squamous, 603–604, 604f
Papillon-Lefèvre syndrome, 48, 101, 259
Papoose board, 316–317, 317f, 522, 523f,
529
Paralleling technique, in periapical
radiography, 23, 25f
Paraplegia, 529
Parents
child behavior and, 294, 301
contact with dental office, 1–3
instructions for sedation, 322
Patient care coordinator, in cleft lip and
palate management, 483
Patient discharge, for sedation
criteria for, 317b
instruction after, 317b
Patient selection, for sedation, 321–322
indications for, 321
informed consent, 321–322
instructions to parents in, 322
preoperative evaluation of, 321
Patient systems. see Practice management
Pattern of growth
facial, 381–383, 381f, 383f
of occlusion, 383–385, 384f, 384t
Pedi-Wrap, 522, 524f, 529
Pediatric Anesthesia and
Neurodevelopment Assessment study
(PANDA), 305
Pediatric condition falsification, 111–112
Pediatric dentist, in cleft lip and palate
management, 481–482
Pediatrician, in cleft lip and palate
management, 483–484
Pedigree, genetic, 92, 92f
Penciclovir (Denavir), for herpes simplex
virus infection, 247
Penetrance, genetic, 96
Periadenitis mucosa necrotica recurrens,
248
Periapical radiography, 23
Peridex, 251
Periodontal disease, 243–273
calculus and, 271–272
in cerebral palsy, 530
in children, 256–259
early onset/aggressive periodontitis,
257

Periodontal disease (Continued)
extrinsic stains and deposits on teeth,
270–271
free gingival autograft, 266–268,
267f–268f
generalized aggressive, 257, 257f
genetics and, 99–101
aggressive (early-onset), 101, 101f
lasers for, 268–269
localized aggressive, 257–258, 258f
mandibular frenectomy and vestibular
depth increase, techniques for,
265–266
complete denudation, 265
periosteum retention, 265
vestibular incision, 265–266,
265f–266f
oral cleanliness and, 269–270
plaque control record, 269–270,
269f
screening and recording, 270
and systemic disease, 259–269
frenum attachment, 264, 264f
gingival recession, 260
Papillon-Lefèvre syndrome, 259–260,
259f–262f
premature bone loss in primary
dentition, 259
self-mutilation, 260–264, 263f
Periodontal ligament injection, 281–282
Periodontal therapy, for hemophilia,
545–546
Periodontitis
early onset/aggressive, 257
treatment of, 258–259
generalized aggressive, 257, 257f
in HIV infection, 551
localized aggressive, 257–258, 258f
and systemic disease, 259–269
frenum attachment, 264, 264f
gingival recession, 260
Papillon-Lefèvre syndrome, 259–260,
259f–262f
premature bone loss in primary
dentition, 259
self-mutilation, 260–264, 263f
PerioGard, 251
Peri-Press syringe, 281
Permanent dentition, in cleft lip and
palate, 494–497
Permanent teeth
ankylosed, 360–362, 363f–364f
anterior, cosmetic procedures for,
202–204
bonded composite veneer, 202,
202f–203f
bonded laminate veneer, 202–204,
203f–204f
in cleft lip and palate, 481
congenital absence of, 422
displacement of anterior teeth
(luxation), 586–596
avulsion and replantation, 588–593,
589f–590f
intrusion and extrusion, 587–588
eruption of. see Eruption of teeth
eruption times for, 385

695

Permanent teeth (Continued)
occlusion, development of. see
Occlusion, developing
pulpotomy for, 228, 229f
surgical procedures for. see Oral surgery
trauma effects on tooth buds, 585–586,
585f–586f
dentin production, 586
dilaceration, 586, 586f
hypocalcification and hypoplasia,
585–586, 586f
Peroxyl, 244
Petechiae, in leukemia, 555, 555f
PFAPA (periodic fever, aphthous
stomatitis, pharyngitis, adenitis), 248
Pfeiffer syndrome, 96
Pharmacokinetics, of nitrous oxide, 309
Pharyngeal throat pack, 337–339,
340f–344f
Phenotype, 87
Phenylketonuria, 93
Phenytoin, gingival overgrowth induced
by, 254–256, 254f
Philadelphia chromosome, 553
Phosphoric acid, for etching, 179
Phosphorus, dietary, 143
Photoplethysmography, pulp blood flow,
223, 223f
Photo-stimulable phosphor storage
plates, 21, 21f–22f
Physical abuse, 110, 111t
indicators of, 112–113, 113f
Physical activity, and dietary guidelines,
147
Physical examination
see also Mouth, examination of
before general anesthesia, 331–334,
332f–333f, 333b–334b
Piercing of tongue, 72–73, 73f
Pigmentation of teeth, 65–68
bleaching, 68, 68f
in cystic fibrosis, 67
in hyperbilirubinemia, 65–66, 67f
in porphyria, 66–67
in tetracycline therapy, 67–68, 67f
Pin-index yoke system, 314, 316f
Pit-and-fissure sealants, 177–184
clinical trials of, 177–178
preventive resin restoration in,
181–184, 182f–183f
rationale for use of, 178
for SHCN patients, 519
technique, 179–181, 180f
application, 181
cleaning, 179
etching, 179
isolation, 179
occlusal interferences, 181
reevaluation, 181
washing, 181
tooth selection for, 178–179
Planes. see Cephalometrics
Plaque
chlorhexidine effects, 251–252
control of
age-specific
adolescents, 135

696

Index

Plaque (Continued)
infants, 133, 133f
prenatal counseling, 133
preschoolers, 134, 134f
school-aged children, 134–135
toddlers, 133–134, 134f
chemotherapeutic, 129–132, 130b
antiseptic agents, 129–132,
130f–131f
enzymes, 132
plaque attachment interference
agents, 132
plaque-modifying agents, 132
sugar substitutes, 132
in-office oral hygiene programs, 135
mechanical methods, 121–129
dentifrices, 125–126, 125f
disclosing agents, 126–127, 126f
floss, 123–124, 123f–124f
manual toothbrush, 121–123,
121f–123f
other devices, 127
powered or electric, 124
techniques in, 127–128
time considerations in, 129
visual-motor skill mastery,
128–129
formation of, microbial aspects of, 121
gingivitis induced by, 244–245, 245f
in SHCN patients, 517f, 518
Plaque-modifying agents, 132
Plastic and reconstructive surgeon, in
cleft lip and palate management,
484
Pogonion, 394
Policy development, dental public health
and, 649
Polycarboxylate cement, 219
Polygenic traits, 91
Polymorphisms, single nucleotide, 87,
88f
Pontics, 503
Popsicle stick therapy, 445, 445f
Porion, 394
Porphyria, and pigmentation of teeth,
66–67
Porphyromonas-like species, 258
Postanesthesia care unit, 342
Posterior maxillary occlusal technique, in
bitewing radiography, 26–27
Postoperative care, 342–344, 345f, 346b,
347f
Postural extension, 530
Potency, of anesthetics, 336–337
Poverty
development and, 286–287
dietary intake patterns and, 140
malnutrition and, 141
Povidone-iodine, as oral antimicrobial
agent, 172
PPO. see Preferred provider organization
(PPO)
Practice management, 653–682
doctor’s vision for, 654
employee management, 661–668, 665f
coach to improved performance, 667
dismissal of employee, 667–668

Practice management (Continued)
interviewing, hiring, and training,
662–664
job descriptions, 664–667
leadership duties, 664
office manual, 661
orientation and training, 663
performance review, 666–667
personnel needs, 661
personnel records, 661–662
standard operating procedures
manual, 662
systems management, 664
wages, raises, and benefits, 668
fiscal management, 654–658
accounts payable, 657
budget setting, 656
business plan, 654–655, 655b
fees, 657, 657f–658f
monitor goal numbers, 655–656
monitoring reports regularly,
656–657
monitoring schedule, 656
retirement planning, 658
mission statement, 654
successful dental practice, 653–654,
654f
systems, 668–681
clinical organization, 681, 682f
collection management, 671–673,
672f–673f
compliance, 681
dental office technology, 681
effective scheduling, 671
external marketing, 680
initial telephone call, 668
insurance management, 673–676,
674f
internal marketing, 679
inventory control, 681
managed care, 675–676
new-patient appointment, 668–671,
669f
surgical referrals, 671
treatment tracking, 676–678
team dynamics, 658–668, 660f
Preferred provider organization (PPO),
676
Prenatal counseling, 133
Preschoolers
dental caries in, 157–158
home oral hygiene for, 134, 134f
nutrition, 140
President’s Committee on Mental
Retardation, 522
Prevotella intermedia, 252
Primary bone grafting, 489
Primary dentition
in cleft lip and palate, 490, 491f
eruption of, sequence of, 385
terminus, occlusion of, 383, 384f,
384t. see also Occlusion,
developing
Primary teeth
see also specific tooth
ankylosis of molars, with no
permanent successors, 360, 362f

Primary teeth (Continued)
anterior, proximal incisal caries in,
194–196, 194f–196f
cavity preparation in, 189–190, 190f
class I cavity
deep-seated, 190–191
pit or fissure, 190
in very young child, 190
class II cavity, 191–193, 191f–192f
aesthetic materials, 192–193
amalgam, 191, 192f
dentin involvement, 191
resin infiltrate, 193
small lesions, 191, 191f–192f
class III cavity, 193, 193f
modified, 193–194, 193f–194f
development and morphology of,
80–86
early development and calcification
of anterior primary teeth, 81
of posterior teeth and first
permanent molar, 81–82
histodifferentiation and
morphodifferentiation (Bell
stage), 81, 81f
life cycle of tooth, 80–81, 81f
initiation (bud stage), 80
proliferation (cap stage), 80–81,
81f
mandibular canine, 83
mandibular central incisor, 82
mandibular first molar, 84
mandibular lateral incisor, 82
mandibular second molar, 84
maxillary canine, 82
maxillary central incisor, 82–84,
82f–83f
maxillary first molar, 83, 83f–84f
maxillary lateral incisor, 82
maxillary second molar, 83–84
primary and permanent teeth, 84,
85b
primary tooth pulp chamber, 84–86
displacement of anterior teeth
(luxation)
avulsion and replantation, 588–593,
589f–590f
intrusion and extrusion, 587, 587f
pulp treatment exfoliation or
over-retention of, 239–240, 240f
pulpotomy for, 229–230, 230f
root fracture of, 593, 596f
Primate spaces, 415–416
Primordium, 80
Progeria syndrome, 48, 368–372
Prognathism, 407, 408f
Promethazine, 310–311
Prosthetic therapy, advantages of, 484
Prosthodontic treatment of adolescent
patient, 498–512
fixed partial dentures, 500–503
complete crown retainers, 502–503
pontics, 503
resin-bonded retainers, 500–502,
501f–504f
implant prostheses, 506–507,
507f–508f

Index

Prosthodontic treatment of adolescent
patient (Continued)
before growth completion, 507,
509f–510f
for orthodontic anchorage, 507
mouthguards, protective, 508–511,
511f
overdentures, 505, 506f
recare program, 507–508
removable partial dentures, 503–505,
505f
restoration of single malformed,
discolored, or fractured teeth,
498–500
crowns, 498–499, 499f–500f
pulpal involvement, 499–500
Prosthodontist, in cleft lip and palate
management, 482–483, 483f
Protrusion, 407
Pseudohypophosphatasia, 45
Pseudomembranous lesion, 550
Psychiatrist, in cleft lip and palate
management, 484
Psychological effects of hospitalization,
329–330
Psychologist, in cleft lip and palate
management, 484
Pterygoid vertical plane, 395
Pterygomaxillary fissure, 394
Pt point, 395
Puberty, gingivitis, 252, 252f
Pulp cap, direct, vital pulp exposures
treatment of, 569–572, 572f
Pulp chamber, primary, 84–86
Pulp therapy, 232, 233f
capping materials for, 233–236
calcium hydroxide, 233–234, 234f
experiments, 235
ferric sulfate, 234–235
formalin, 234, 235f
mineral trioxide aggregate, 235
zinc oxide-eugenol, 233
of deep caries, indirect pulp treatment,
224–226, 224f–226f
diagnostic aids for
clinical signs and symptoms, 222
pain, 221–222
physical condition of patient,
223–224
pulp testing, 223, 223f
radiographic interpretation, 222,
222f–223f
failure after, 236–239, 238f
alveolar abscess, 239
internal resorption, 237–239, 239f
nonvital, with irreversible pulpitis or
necrotic pulp, 230–232
pulpectomy, 230–232, 230f–233f
primary teeth exfoliation or overretention, 239–240, 240f
prognosis of, 224
restoration of involved tooth, 232–233
techniques of, 227–230
direct pulp capping, 227–228, 227f
pulpotomy, 228–230, 228f
for permanent teeth, 228, 229f
for primary teeth, 229–230, 230f

Pulp therapy (Continued)
vital pulp exposure, 226–227
size and pulpal hemorrhage,
226–227, 227f
Pulpal involvement, for single teeth,
499–500
Pulpal therapy
for hemophilia, 546
for leukemia, 556
Pulpectomy, 230–232, 230f–233f
Pulpotomy, vital pulp exposures
treatment of, 572, 573f–574f
Pulse oximetry, 323

Q

Quad-helix appliance, 451f, 454
Quadriplegia, 529
Quantitative transmission disequilibrium
test, 98
Quartz-tungsten-halogen lamp, 210–211
Quiet room, 319

R

Radiographic techniques, 17–38
in cephalometrics, 391–393, 392f
frontal (posteroanterior) film,
392–393, 393f
lateral head film, 391–392, 392f
extraoral, 29–30
guidelines for prescribing, 36t–37t
image receptors, 20–23
analog film, 20–21
image-viewing conditions, 22–23,
23f–24f
photo-stimulable phosphor storage
plates, 21, 21f–22f
solid-state sensors, 21, 22f
interpretation of radiographs, 32–35
intraoral, 23–29
localization, 27–29, 31f
protection from, 17–20
basics of, 17–18, 18t
dental staff, 18–19, 19f
patient, 19–20, 19f–20f
safety for, 17–20
selection criteria and examinations,
30–32
Radiography
in children, 11
of pulp, 222, 222f–223f
of SHCN patients, 515, 515f–516f
Rainbow Stabilizing System, 522, 524f
Rampant dental caries, 158, 159f
Ranulas, 609, 609f, 638–639
Reactive airway disease, 531–532
Recare program, for adolescent, 507–508
Recare system, 677
Recording, dental
examination of, 5, 6f–7f
uniform, 11
Records, personnel, 661–662
Rectangular collimation, 19, 19f
Recurrent herpes labialis (RHL), 247,
247f
for herpes simplex virus infection, 247
Reference points, for lateral tracing in
cephalometrics, 394–395

697

Regenerative endodontic procedures
(REPs), 576–579, 578f
Replantation, of injured tooth, 588–593,
589f–590f
Reporting, of child abuse, 117
REPs. see Regenerative endodontic
procedures (REPs)
Resins
cements, 219–220
preventive restoration, 181–184,
182f–183f
in restoration of primary anterior teeth,
194, 194f
restorative, 208–214
conventional composites, 208–209,
208f–209f, 208t
dental adhesives, 212–214
dentin bonding, 212–214
enamel bonding, 212
hybrid composites, 209–210
inlays, 212
light-cured composites, 210–211,
211f
microfilled composites, 209, 209f
posterior composite restoration,
211–212
Resorption
after pulp therapy, 237–239, 239f
external, 582, 582f
internal, 581–582, 581f
Respiratory diseases
asthma, 531–532
bronchopulmonary dysplasia, 532
cystic fibrosis, 533
Restoration
after vital pulp therapy, 232–233
of fractured teeth, 584–585
aesthetic bonded composite resin,
584–585, 584f–585f
in prosthodontic treatment of
adolescent, 498–500
temporary and permanent, 207–208
Restorative dentistry, 185–205
see also Trauma, to teeth and supporting
tissues
AAPD guidelines for, 185
alternative treatment in, 201–202
cavity preparation in primary teeth,
189–190, 190f
class I cavity, 190
class II cavity, 191–193, 191f–192f
class III cavity, 193, 193f–194f
clamp selection for, 187–188,
187f–189f
common materials for, 185–186
controversies in pediatric, 204–205
laser use, 204
minimalist approach, 204–205, 204f
cosmetic procedures for permanent
anterior teeth, 202–204
bonded composite veneer, 202,
202f–203f
bonded laminate veneer, 202–204,
203f–204f
crowns, stainless steel, for posterior
teeth, 197–199, 197f
contouring of, 199, 200f

698

Index

Restorative dentistry (Continued)
size selection, 199, 199f
tooth preparation, 198–199, 198f
Isolite system in, 188–189, 189f
maintenance of clean field in, 186–188
morphologic considerations in, 189
in operating room, 339–341, 344f
proximal incisal caries in primary
anterior teeth, 194–196
aesthetic resin restoration, 194, 194f
direct resin crowns, 196, 196f
stainless steel crowns, 195–196, 195f
rubber dam placement, 187, 187f
in young permanent teeth, 196–197
Retainers
complete crown, 502–503
resin-bonded, 500–502, 501f–504f
Retention scheme, 474
Retirement planning, 658
Retractors, for oral surgery, 628, 628f
Retraining, in behavior management, 299
Retrognathism, 407, 407f
Retrusion, 407
Rhabdomyosarcoma, 560, 619–620
Rheumatic fever, 536
RHL. see Recurrent herpes labialis (RHL)
Rickets
familial or X-linked
hypophosphatemic, or vitamin
D-resistant, 48
vitamin D deficiency, 145
Ringworm infection, 5, 8f
Roll method, of toothbrushing, 127
Root canal therapy, pulpotomy, 572
Root resorption, external apical, 104
Rubber bite blocks, 521
Rubber dam
in hemophilia, 546
isolation, 593
placement of, 187, 187f
Rubella embryopathy, and enamel
hypoplasia, 52, 53f

S

Saliva, 159–161
deficiency of, 160–161, 161f
flow reduction of, 161
viscosity of, 161
Salt intake, health impact of high, 147–148
Sarcoma, osteogenic, 620
SCA. see Sickle cell anemia (SCA)
Scheduling of appointment, 300
School Breakfast Program (SBP), 140
School children
dental caries in, 158
home oral hygiene for, 134–135
nutrition, 141
Scleroderma, and periodontitis, 259
Scorbutic gingivitis, 256, 256f
Sealants
see also Pit-and-fissure sealants
cariostatic properties of, 177
chemically cured, 181
cured by light, 177, 180f, 181
effectiveness of, 178
glass-ionomer cement as, 177–178
recommendations for use of, 178

Sedation
combination of methods and agents in,
318–319
conscious, 305
continuum of, 303–305, 304f
deep, 304
documentation of, 320–321
drugs and agents used for, 309
antihistamines, 310–311
diphenhydramine (Benadryl), 311
hydroxyzine, 310
promethazine, 310–311
benzodiazepine agonists and
antagonists, 311–312
diazepam (Valium), 311
flumazenil (Romazicon), 312
midazolam (Versed), 311–312
hypnotics, 313–314
chloral hydrate, 313–314, 319
nitrous oxide and, 309–310, 316f
adverse effects of, 309–310
equipment for, 314, 315f–316f
mechanism of, 309
monitoring and documentation in,
315–316
objectives of, 314
occupational exposure to,
recommendations for
minimizing, 310b
pharmacokinetics of, 309
technique for, 314–315
toxicity of, 310
opioid agonists and antagonists,
312–313
fentanyl (Sublimaze), 313
meperidine (Demerol), 313
naloxone (Narcan), 313
oral, 305, 318–319
enteral technique, 316–317
facilities and equipment for, 319–320
general anesthesia and, 304–305, 320t
intravenous, 305
levels of, 320t
minimal, 304
moderate, 304
monitoring of, 322–324, 323f–324f
intraoperative, 322–324
patient discharge for
criteria for, 317b
instruction after, 317b
Seizure disorders, in cerebral palsy, 530
Self-mutilation, 260–264, 263f
Sella-Nasion plane (SN), 395
Sella turcica, 394
Sensitivity, pulpal inflammation, 222
Sensory deficits or dysfunctions, in
cerebral palsy, 530
Septocaine, 277
Sequestrum, eruption, 355, 355f
Sevoflurane, 337
Sexual abuse, 111, 111t
SHCN. see Special health care needs
(SHCN)
Sickle cell anemia (SCA), 548–549
Single nucleotide polymorphisms, 87,
88f
Singleton-Merten syndrome, 48

Sjögren syndrome, 161
“Snow-capped teeth,” 95
Social media, practice management,
680–681
Social worker, in cleft lip and palate
management, 484
Socialization, of children, 287–291
Society of Teachers of Family Medicine,
650–651
Socioeconomic status, dental caries and,
161–162
Soft tissues
anesthesia for, 275–277
benign tumors, 603–609
congenital epulis of newborn,
608–609, 608f
fibroma, 604
peripheral odontogenic (WHO
type), 605–606
peripheral ossifying, 605–606
granulomas
peripheral giant cell, 606
pyogenic, 604, 605f
hemangioma, 607–608
lymphangioma, 608
mucocele, 609, 609f
neurofibroma, 606–607, 607f
ranula, 609, 609f
squamous papilloma, 603–604, 604f
verruca vulgaris, 603–604, 604f
von Recklinghausen disease,
606–607, 607f
cephalometric assessment of, 400, 400f
complications of anesthesia, 283, 283f
surgical procedures for, 638–640
Software programs, for digital imaging, 402
Solid-state sensors, 21, 22f
Space analysis, mixed dentition, 386
Space maintainers
caries and, 162
fixed, 432, 432f
Space maintenance, in developing
occlusion, early loss of teeth and,
418–435, 421f
assessment of, 418–423, 423f
canines, 424–425, 426f
first primary molar loss, 425–428,
427f–428f
incisors, 423–424, 424f–426f
multiple primary molar loss, 432,
433f–434f
permanent molar loss, 433–435,
435f–436f
second primary molar loss, 428–432,
429f–432f
specific strategies for, 423–435
Special health care needs (SHCN),
513–539
autism spectrum disorder, 528–529
cerebral palsy, 529–531
dental access, 514–515, 514t, 515f
during dental treatment, 519–522
Down syndrome, 527
fetal alcohol spectrum disorder, 528
first dental visit, 515
fragile X syndrome, 528
hearing loss, 533–534, 533t

Index

Special health care needs (Continued)
heart disease, 535–537
acquired
infective endocarditis, 536,
537b–538b
rheumatic fever, 536
cardiac surgery patients, 537
congenital, 535–536, 536f
dental management, 537
intellectual disability, 522–527, 527t
learning disabilities, 527–528
preventive dentistry, 516–519
diet and nutrition, 518–519
fluoride exposure, 519
home dental care, 516–518, 517f–518f
professional supervision, 519
restorations, 519
protective stabilization, 519–522,
520f–521f, 523f–526f
radiographic examination, 515,
515f–516f
respiratory diseases
asthma, 531–532
bronchopulmonary dysplasia, 532
cystic fibrosis, 533
spina bifida and latex allergy, 531
visual impairment, 534–535
Special-needs patients, radiographic
exposures in, 32
Speech disorders, in cerebral palsy, 530
Speech pathologist, in cleft lip and palate
management, 484
Spina bifida
genetics and, 97
and latex allergy, 531
Splints for root fractures, 595, 596f
Stabilization, for SHCN patients,
519–522, 520f–521f, 523f–526f
Stainless steel
alloy in restorations, 185–186
crowns
for posterior teeth, 197–199, 197f
for primary anterior teeth, 195–196,
195f
Stains and deposits on teeth, extrinsic,
270–271
black stain, 271, 271f
green stain, 270, 271f
orange stain, 270, 271f
removal of, 271
stannous fluoride application, 271
Standard operating procedures (SOP)
manual, 662
Startle reflex, 530
Statistics, of child abuse and neglect, 112
Stethoscope, pretracheal, 323f
Stimulus generalization, 299
Stomatitis, aphthous recurrent, 248
Strangulation marks, 115, 115f
Streptococcus mutans, dental caries and,
11, 99
Streptococcus sanguis, 248–249
Streptococcus sobrinus, 156
Substance abuse, 13–14
etiologic factors, 14
specific substance and frequency of
use, 14

Suction tip, Fraser, 629f
Sugar substitutes, in plaque control, 132
Suicide tendencies, in children and
adolescents, 14–15
Supernumerary teeth, 462–464,
463f–465f
in cleft lip and palate, 481
Supplemental Nutrition Assistance
Program, 142
Surgery. see Oral surgery
Sutton disease, 248
Swallowing, tongue-thrust, 440–443, 443f
Syrijet Mark II, 275
Syringes, for periodontal ligament
injection, 281
Systems. see Practice management

T

Taurodontism, 56, 56f
in amelogenesis imperfecta, 60
Tay-Sachs disease, 93
TDO. see Trichodento-osseous syndrome
(TDO)
Team dynamics, 658–668
Teething, and difficult eruption, 354–355
ectopic, 355
hematoma in, 354, 355f
sequestrum in, 355, 355f
Tell-show-do, 299, 299f
behavior shaping and, 299
Temporomandibular disorders, 5, 9f
Tetracaine, in pain control, 275
Tetracycline therapy, and pigmentation
of teeth, 67–68, 67f
Thrush, 250, 250f
Thumb sucking, 437, 437f, 439f–441f
Thymol, as oral antimicrobial agent, 172
Time considerations, for oral hygiene,
129
Time-out protocol
in anesthetic preparation of the child,
337, 338f–340f
end of, 341–342
Timing of interventions. see Occlusion,
developing
Tobacco smoking, by adolescents, 14
Toddlers, home oral hygiene for,
133–134, 134f
Tolerance, of dentist, 297
Tongue
anomalies of, 69–73
ankyloglossia, 70, 70f
black hairy, 72, 72f
coated, 71–72, 72f
fissured tongue and geographic
tongue, 71, 71f
indentation of margin, 72
macroglossia, 70
median rhomboid glossitis, 72
tongue piercing in, 72–73, 73f
trauma, 72–73
white strawberry, 72
scrapers, 127
Tongue blades, 445, 445f, 520–521
Tongue-thrust swallowing, 440–443,
443f
Tonic labyrinthine reflex, 530

699

Tooth (teeth)
agenesis of, 61–64
anodontia, 61–62, 62f
ectodermal dysplasias, 64, 65f–66f
hypodontia (oligodontia), 62–63
and cancer, 63–64
and palatally displaced canines, 63
ankylosed, 357–360, 359f–361f, 632,
632f
permanent teeth, 360–362, 363f–364f
of primary molars with no
permanent successors, 360, 362f
in cleft lip and palate, 481
congenitally missing, 464–467, 466f
developmental anomalies of, 41–43
eruption of teeth. see Eruption of teeth
fractured, restoration of, 584–585
pigmentation of, 65–68
bleaching, 68, 68f
in cystic fibrosis, 67
in hyperbilirubinemia, 65–66, 67f
in porphyria, 66–67
in tetracycline therapy, 67–68, 67f
posterior, stainless steel crowns for,
197–199, 197f
contouring of, 199, 200f
size selection of, 199, 199f
tooth preparation, 198–199, 198f
reattachment of, fragment restoration,
568–569, 570f
replanted
endodontic management of, 593
stabilization of, 591–593, 591f–592f
selection of, for sealing, 178–179
single malformed, discolored, or
fractured, in adolescent, 498–500
size and arch size of, 386
stains and deposits on, 270–271
surgery procedures for. see Oral surgery
trauma effects
ankylosis, 582–584
calcification, dystrophic, 580–581,
580f–581f
external resorption, 582, 582f
hemorrhage, internal, 580, 580f
internal resorption, 581–582, 581f
pulpal hyperemia, 579–580
pulpal necrosis, 582, 583f
Toothbrush/toothbrushing
in leukemia, 556–557
manual, 121–123, 121f–123f
in plaque reduction, 166
powered or electric, 124
for SHCN patients, 516, 518f
techniques for, 127–128, 127f
Tooth-charting systems, 11
Toothpaste, fluoridated, 168
Topical rinses, for aphthous ulcers, 249
Topicale, 275
Toxicity
of local anesthesia, 282–283, 283t
of mercury, 217–218
of nitrous oxide sedation, 310
Training, of personnel, 662–664
Tramadol, for postoperative pain, 284t
Tranexamic acid, 544–545
Translocation, chromosomal, 91t

700

Index

Transpalatal bar, 432, 432f
Transpalatal wires, with springs, fixed,
448–449, 448f
Transplantation of stem cells.
see Hematopoietic stem cell
transplantation
Trauma
and aphthous ulcers, 249
in cerebral palsy, 530
and enamel hypoplasia, 51, 51f–52f
to teeth and supporting tissues,
563–602
clinical examination of, 566–567,
567f
displacement of anterior teeth
(luxation), 586–596
avulsion and replantation,
588–593, 589f–590f
intrusion and extrusion, 586–588
emergency treatment of
of fractured teeth without pulp
exposure, 568–569
soft-tissue injury, 568
temporary bonded resin
restoration, 569, 571f
fractured roots, 593–596
history and examination of,
563–568, 564f–565f
oral burns, 596–600, 599f
other displacement injuries requiring
stabilization, 596
permanent tooth buds, 585–586,
585f–586f
dilaceration, 586, 586f
hypocalcification and hypoplasia,
585–586, 586f
reparative dentin production, 586
prevention of, 600–601
radiographic examination of,
567–568, 567f
reaction tooth, 579–584
ankylosis, 582–584
calcification, 580–581, 580f–581f
external resorption, 582, 582f
hemorrhage, 580, 580f
internal resorption,
581–582, 581f
pulpal hyperemia, 579–580
pulpal necrosis, 582, 583f
restoration of fractured, 584–585
vital pulp exposures treatment,
569–573
see also Pulp therapy
to tongue, 72–73, 73f
Traumatic bone cyst, 638, 639f
Treacher-Collins syndrome, 484
Triangle, pediatric dentistry treatment,
286, 287f
Triangular sheet technique, 522, 524f
Trichodento-osseous syndrome (TDO),
60
Trisomy, 90, 90f
Trisomy 21 syndrome. see Down
syndrome
Trituration, 215
Truthfulness, in dental team, 296

Tumors
benign
of bone
cemento-ossifying fibroma, 611,
611f
central giant cell granuloma,
611–612, 612f
fibro-osseous lesions of jaw,
609–610
fibrous dysplasia, 610–611, 610f
juvenile ossifying fibroma, 611
of oral soft tissues, 603–609
congenital epulis of newborn,
608–609, 608f
fibroma, 604
granulomas, 604, 605f
hemangioma, 607–608
lymphangioma, 608
mucocele, 609, 609f
neurofibroma and
neurofibromatosis (von
Recklinghausen disease),
606–607, 607f
ranula, 609, 609f
squamous papilloma, verruca
vulgaris, and condyloma
acuminatum, 603–604, 604f
malignant, 619–623
Ewing’s sarcoma, 620–621, 621f
fibromatosis and fibrosarcoma, 619
Langerhans cell histiocytosis
(histiocytosis X), 621–623, 622f
osteogenic sarcoma, 620
rhabdomyosarcoma, 619–620
odontogenic, 615–619
adenomatoid, 616–617, 616f
ameloblastic fibroma, 617
ameloblastic fibro-odontoma, 618
ameloblastoma, 615–616
myxoma, 617
odontoma, 618–619, 618f
solid, 560
Turner syndrome, 90
Turner tooth, 51, 586
Twin studies
for cleft lip and palate, 104
for dental caries, 99
in nature-nurture argument, 98
for periodontal disease, 100

U

Ulcerative lesions, in leukemia, 557
Ultrasound imaging, 30, 35f
Undernutrition, pediatric, 142–145
Unerupted tooth, 54, 55f
Uniform Federal Accessibility Standards,
514
Urea peroxide, for plaque control, 132
Urethane dimethacrylate resin, 208

V

Vaccine, for caries, 172
Valacyclovir, for herpes simplex virus
infection, 247
Varnishes, fluoride-containing, 168
Vegetarians, vitamin B12 deficiency in, 145

Velocity, of growth, 375
Veneers
composite, 202, 202f–203f
laminate, 202–204, 203f–204f
resin and ceramic, 219–220
Verruca vulgaris, 603–604, 604f
Vertical arch discrepancies, 405
Videotapes, for behavior modification,
295
Vincent infection, 249, 250f
Vineland Adaptive Behavior Scales, 291
Viral hepatitis, 547–549
Viral infection, in HIV infection, 550–551
Visual impairment, 534–535
Vital pulp exposures, treatment of
direct pulp cap, 569–572, 572f
pulpectomy with endodontic
treatment, 572–573
pulpotomy, 572, 573f–574f
regenerative endodontic procedures,
576–579, 578f
root growth stimulation and apical
repair after pulpal necrosis
(apexification), 573–576, 575f,
577f
Vitamin A, 143
Vitamin B12, 145
Vitamin D, 144–145
Vitamin supplements, for children, 151
Vitapex, 231–232
Voice control, 297–298
von Recklinghausen disease, 606–607,
607f
von Willebrand disease (VWD), 540–541,
543

W

Wages, in practice management, 668
W-arch appliance, 451f, 454
Wechsler intelligence scales, 291
Weider retractor, 628, 628f
White strawberry tongue, 72
Wilms’ tumor, 560
Witkop syndrome, 64
Wrapped tongue blades, 520–521

X

X-linked or sex-linked inheritance, 94–95
dominant, 94, 94f
recessive, 95, 95f
Xylitol, as oral antimicrobial agent, 172

Y

Yankauer or tonsillar suction, 629f
Y chromosome, 94

Z

Zinc, dietary, 143–144, 143b
Zinc oxide-eugenol, 218
cement, 164–165
for pulp capping, 233
in pulpotomy, 230
Zinc phosphate cement, 218
Zirconia crowns, 200–201, 201f
Zovirax, 246–247
Zygosity, 98

